Join AZ Animals FREE to get amazing animal facts, printable animal activities, and much more sent directly to you Join Free!
Main Menu
All Animals
Animals
Articles
Reviews
Pets
Places
Quizzes
About
Search
Fish: Different Types, Definitions, Photos, and More
By Rebecca Bales
Updated: January 3, 2023
© Arif Supriyadi/Shutterstock.com
Share on:
Animals Home
All Animals
Fish: Different Types, Definitions, Photos, and More
Find your favorite Animals!
Search
Advertisement
A-Z Animals was founded on three guiding principles: accurate content you can trust, spreading knowledge on the animal kingdom, and giving back. Today, more than 30,000 species are threatened with extinction, and thousands would already be lost without tireless conservation efforts. Knowing that the first step toward conservation is spreading knowledge of the incredible animals species across our planet, A-Z Animals was founded in 2008 to offer an online encyclopedic resource across animals of all kinds.
WATCH: Sharks biting alligators, the most epic lion battles, and MUCH more.
Enter your email in the box below to get the most mind-blowing animal stories and videos delivered directly to your inbox every day.
Fish are aquatic vertebrates. They usually have gills, paired fins, a long body covered with scales, and tend to be cold-blooded.
“Fish” is a term used to refer to lampreys, sharks, coelacanths, and ray-finned fishes, but is not a taxonomic group, which is a clade or group containing a common ancestor and all its descendants.
Instead, there are 3 main classes, groups, or types of fish: bony fish (Osteichthyes), jawless fish (Agnatha), and cartilaginous fish (Chondrichthyes). Fish are the most diverse group among vertebrates, with over 33,000 different types of fish species.
No one really knows how many different types of fish exist in the world, more are being discovered constantly. We may soon have over 35,000, or even 40,000 known species!
5 Fish Characteristics
There are three superclasses into which fish are grouped: Bony fish, jawless, and cartilaginous fish.
©Lynn Archer/Shutterstock.com
There are three superclasses into which fish are grouped: Bony fish (Osteichthyes), jawless fish (Agnatha), and cartilaginous fish (Chondrichthyes). Ray-finned fishes are of the class Actinopterygii, while lobe-finned fishes are of the class Sarcopterygii. Both are clades of bony fishes.
Regardless, all fish have some characteristics in common that distinguish them from other animals.
Cold-bloodedness: All fish are ectothermic or cold-blooded, meaning they cannot regulate their internal body temperature. Even warm-blooded fish such as tuna and mackerel sharks have only “regional endothermy” or warm-bloodedness limited to certain areas.
Water habitat: All fish live in bodies of water, whether it is freshwater or saltwater. However, not all creatures that live in water are fish.
Gills to breathe: Fish have gills throughout their life cycle. As with the water habitat, although all fish have gills, not all creatures with gills are fish.
Swim bladders: Specialized organs fill with air to keep the fish afloat and in some species help them survive with low oxygen levels. They also help fish sleep and are sensitive enough to detect the movement of food and predators.
Fins for movement: Most common are a tail fin, a pair of side fins, a dorsal fin, and an anal fin. Variations exist but they all provide motion, maneuverability, and stability.
For a list of incredible facts about fish, make sure to read ‘10 Incredible Fish Facts.’
Diet
Fish eat crustaceans, plants, shrimp, and worms.
What do fish eat? Most species of fish fall into the omnivore category. This means that they can eat both plants and meat. It offers a wider range of food options for aquatic animals. It also helps fish find the different nutrition they need in a variety of foods.
Additionally, pet fish may have a bit of a different diet than fish you find in the wild. For example, pet fish mostly eat freeze-dried and frozen foods including bloodworms, brine shrimp, krill, and plankton.
Evolution and Origins
Oilfish contain high levels of wax esters, which are indigestible to humans.
©Porco_Rosso/Shutterstock.com
Fish have been evolving and changing for a very, very long time. Fish began to evolve during the Cambrian explosion approximately 530 million years ago. The earliest chordates formed skulls and spinal columns, which helped to evolve craniates and vertebrates. Additionally, the earliest fish lineages were the Agnatha or the jawless fish.
Early fish from fossil records are represented by a group of small armored and jawless fish. These were known as ostracoderm. These jawless fish lineages are mostly extinct now. However, an extant clade, the lampreys may have pre-dated the ancient pre-jawed fish. The first jaws were found in fossils and they lacked any teeth.
The diversity of these jawed creatures may prove the evolutionary advantages of a jawed mouth. Although interesting, it remains unclear if there was ever an advantage of a hinged jaw.
Furthermore, fish may have evolved from a creature similar to a coral sea squirt whose larva resembled primitive fish in very important ways.
Exceptions
Hagfish are the only animals that have a skull but no vertebral column.
©Frank Fennema/Shutterstock.com
There are several exceptions to the common definition of a fish. For example, hagfish don’t have scales and aren’t true vertebrates (or are considered primitive vertebrates); mudskippers are amphibious fish that can live outside water; lungfish use lungs instead of gills to breathe; lampreys lack paired fins, and tuna are warm-blooded.
Also, not all fish groups come from fish lineages. The superclass Tetrapoda of the four-listed animals is considered to be a group within Sarcopterygii and includes amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals. Hence, Sarcopterygii includes both lobe-finned fishes and tetrapods.
Finally, not all aquatic creatures which resemble fish are considered fish. Whales, dolphins, and porpoises are aquatic mammals, for example.
You can read about some types of fish that are extinct.
Pregnancy
A Siamese female fighting fish guarding her newly laid eggs amongst the bubble nest.
©mnoor/Shutterstock.com
There are two main types of fish pregnancies, ovoviviparity or aplacental viviparity (egg-bearing) and viviparous (embryo-bearing). Both are considered to be live-bearing.
Ovoviparity has the eggs develop and hatch internally, with the young being born alive. It can express either ovuliparity (external fertilization of eggs and zygote development), oviparity (internal fertilization of eggs and external development of zygotes as eggs with yolks), or ovoviviparity (internal fertilization of eggs and internal development of embryos with yolks). Stingrays, seahorses, and some shark species are ovoviviparous. So are guppies, mollies, swordtails, halfbeaks and platies.
Viviparity has embryos develop internally before being born live. It can express either histotrophic (“tissue-eating”) viviparity (mother provides no nutrition and embryos eat their unborn siblings or mother’s unfertilized eggs) or hemotrophic (“blood-eating) viviparity (mother provides nutrition, usually through a placenta). Many shark species are viviparous.
Check out the fish gestation period.
Different Types of Fish:
List of Fish
Alaskan Pollock
Albacore Tuna
Alligator Gar
Amano Shrimp
Amberjack
American Eel
American Paddlefish
Anchovies
Angelfish
Anglerfish
Arapaima
Archerfish
Arctic Char
Asian Arowana
Asian Carp
Atlantic Cod
Atlantic Salmon
Atlantic Sturgeon
Australian Flathead Perch
Baiji
Banana Eel
Banjo Catfish
Barb
Barracuda
Barramundi Fish
Barreleye Fish (Barrel Eye)
Basking Shark
Bass
Batfish
Beluga Sturgeon
Beluga Sturgeon
Betta Fish (Siamese Fighting Fish)
Bigfin Reef Squid 
Black Bass
Black Marlin
Blacknose Shark
Bladefin Basslet
Blobfish
Blue Catfish
Blue Eyed Pleco
Blue Shark
Blue Tang
Bluefin Tuna
Bluegill
Bonefish
Bonito Fish
Bonnethead Shark
Bowfin
Boxfish
Bronze Whaler Shark
Brook Trout
Buffalo Fish
Bull Trout
Butterfly Fish
Carp
Catfish
Chain Pickerel
Chimaera
Chinese Paddlefish
Chinook Salmon
Cichlid
Clearnose Skate
Clownfish
Cobia Fish
Codfish
Coelacanth
Comb Jellyfish
Common Carp
Conger Eel
Cookiecutter Shark
Cory Catfish
Crappie Fish
Cubera Snapper
Damselfish
Danios
Discus
Dragon Eel
Dragonfish
Drum Fish
Dusky Shark
Dwarf Gourami
Eagle Ray
Eel
Eel catfish
Eelpout
Electric Catfish
Electric Eel
Elephant Fish
Ember Tetra
Emperor Angelfish
Escolar
Fangtooth
Fire Eel
Fish
Flathead Catfish
Florida Gar
Flounder
Flounder Fish
Flowerhorn Fish
Fluke Fish (summer flounder)
Flying Fish
Football Fish
Freshwater Drum
Freshwater Eel
Freshwater Jellyfish
Freshwater Sunfish
Frilled Shark
Frogfish
Galapagos Shark
Gar
Garden Eel
Ghost Catfish
Giant Trevally
Goblin Shark
Goby Fish
Golden Shiner
Golden Trout
Goldfish
Goliath Tigerfish
Goonch Catfish
Gourami
Grass Carp
Great Hammerhead Shark
Great White Shark
Green Sunfish
Greenland Shark
Grey Reef Shark
Grunion
Guadalupe Bass
Gulper Catfish 
Gulper Eel 
Guppy
Haddock
Hagfish
Haikouichthys
Hairy Frogfish
Halibut
Hammerhead Shark
Hardhead Catfish
Herring
Hogfish
Horn Shark
Horse Mackerel
Immortal Jellyfish
Irukandji Jellyfish
Jack Crevalle
Jellyfish
John Dory
Kaluga Sturgeon
Kelp Greenling
Keta Salmon
Keyhole Cichlid
Killifish
King Mackerel
King Salmon
Kingklip
Kissing Gourami
Kitefin Shark
Knifefish
Koi Fish
Kokanee Salmon
Krill
Labout’s Fairy Wrasse
Lake Sturgeon
Lake Trout
Lamprey
Lancetfish
Largemouth Bass
Lawnmower Blenny
Leopard Shark
Leptocephalus
Lionfish
Lizardfish
Loach
Longfin Mako Shark
Longnose Gar
Lumpfish
Lungfish
Mahi Mahi (Dolphin Fish)
Mangrove Snapper
Manta Ray
Masked Angelfish
Mayan Cichlid
Megalodon
Megamouth Shark
Mekong Giant Catfish
Milkfish
Mojarra
Mola mola (Ocean Sunfish)
Molly
Monkfish
Moon Jellyfish
Moray Eel
Mudskipper
Mullet Fish
Muskellunge (Muskie)
Needlefish
Neon Tetra
Neptune Grouper
Oarfish
Ocean Perch
Ocean Pout
Ocean Whitefish
Oilfish
Opah
Opaleye (Rudderfish)
Orange Roughy 
Orchid Dottyback
Oscar Fish
Oyster Toadfish
Ozark Bass
Pacific Sleeper Shark
Paddlefish
Parrotfish
Pea Puffer
Peacock Bass
Peppermint Angelfish
Perch Fish
Pictus Catfish
Pike Fish
Pinfish
Pink Salmon
Pipefish
Piranha
Platinum Arowana
Pollock Fish
Pompano Fish
Porbeagle Shark
Porcupinefish
Pufferfish
Pygmy Shark
Pyjama Shark
Rainbow Kribs (Kribensis)
Rainbow Shark
Red Drum Fish
Red-Lipped Batfish
Redear Sunfish
Redhump Eartheater
Redtail Catfish
Reef Shark
Rockfish
Sailfish
Salmon
Salmon Shark
Sand Tiger Shark
Sardines
Sawfish
Scorpion Fish
Sculpin
Sea Dragon
Sea Slug
Sea Trout
Sea Urchin
Seahorse
Shark
Sheepshead Fish
Shortfin Mako Shark
Silky Shark
Silver Dollar
Sixgill shark
Skate Fish
Skipjack Tuna
Sleeper Shark
Smallmouth Bass
Smooth Hammerhead Shark
Snailfish
Snook Fish
Snowflake Eel
Sockeye Salmon
Spanish Mackerel
Speckled Trout
Spinner Shark
Spiny Dogfish
Sponge
Spotted Gar
Spotted Garden Eel
Squirrelfish
Starfish
Stargazer Fish
Steelhead Salmon
Stingray
Stonefish
Stoplight Loosejaw
Striped Bass
Sturgeon
Suckerfish
Surgeonfish
Swai Fish
Swordfish
Taimen Fish
Tang
Tarpon
Telescope Fish
Tetra
Thornback Ray
Thresher Shark
Tiger Muskellunge (Muskie)
Tiger Shark
Tiger Trout
Tire Track Eel
Toadfish
Triggerfish
Trout
Tuna
Uaru Cichlid
Urechis unicinctus (Penis Fish)
Viper Shark (dogfish)
Viperfish
Wahoo Fish
Walking Catfish
Walleye Fish
Wels Catfish
Whale Shark
White Bass
White Catfish
White Crappie
White Sturgeon 
Whiting
Wolf Eel
Wolffish
Wrasse
Wrought Iron Butterflyfish
Xingu River Ray
Xiphactinus
Yellow Bass
Yellow Bullhead Catfish
Yellow Perch
Yellow Tang
Yellowfin Tuna
Yellowtail Snapper
Zebra Pleco
Zebra Shark
Zebrafish (Zebra Fish)
Share on:
About the Author
Rebecca Bales
Rebecca is an experienced Professional Freelancer with nearly a decade of expertise in writing SEO Content, Digital Illustrations, and Graphic Design. When not engrossed in her creative endeavors, Rebecca dedicates her time to cycling and filming her nature adventures. When not focused on her passion for creating and crafting optimized materials, she harbors a deep fascination and love for cats, jumping spiders, and pet rats.
Fish: Different Types, Definitions, Photos, and More FAQs (Frequently Asked Questions) 
What are the 3 types of fish?
Bony fish, jawless fish and cartilaginous fish.
What's the most famous fish?
The most famous fish is the coelacanth, which has four lobed fins resembling limbs. It is one of the world’s most ancient fish species. Its name means “hollow spine” and comes from the Greek words koilos (hollow) and akantha (spine).
Coelacanth also refers to the order Coelacanthiformes. which comes from the clade Sarcopterygii and subclass Actinistia. It includes two species in the genus Latimeria: the West Indian Ocean coelacanth (Latimeria chalumnae) and the Indonesian coelacanth (Latimeria menadoensis).
Can fish feel pain?
Yes, fish can feel pain, but it is different from the expression of pain from humans. It is difficult to test fish for pain except by looking for unusual behavior and physiological responses in reaction to certain stimuli.
What do fish eat?
Fish can be predatory, foraging or filter-feeding. Their diets can be carnivorous or omnivorous depending on the species and can include prey from zooplankton to invertebrates, crustaceans, annelids and smaller fish.
Discover a fish with human-like teeth here!
How do fish breathe?
Fish usually breathe through gills, which filters oxygen through water. However, some fish breathe using different means. Lungfish have lungs and mudskippers can breathe through wet skin and the lining of their mouth and throat.
What are the smallest and largest fish?
The smallest fish is the cyprinid fish (8mm) and the largest fish is the whale shark (12m).
What is the difference between "fish" and "fishes"?
“Fish” refers to the singular and one species or to the plural within context. “Fishes” refers to the plural, especially when talking about more than one species of fish.
What are the main differences between the flying fox fish and the Siamese algae eater?
The main differences between the flying fox fish and the Siamese algae eater are color, length and shape, mouth shape, and algae preferences.
Thank you for reading! Have some feedback for us? Contact the AZ Animals editorial team.
Animal of the Day
Rough Green Snake
Rough green snakes are great pet snakes because they're low-maintenance.
Latest Product Review
The 7 Best Pet Products at Walmart This January
Today
Trending on A-Z Animals
How to Train Your Dalmatian: The 7 Best Methods and Tips
Today
About Us
Contact Us
Sourcing Our Content
Privacy Policy
Terms & Conditions
Editorial Guidelines
As an Amazon Associate I earn from qualifying purchases. Learn more about us & read our affiliate disclosure.
A-Z-Animals.com is Copyright © 2008 - 2024 A-Z Animals
Update Privacy Preferences
A RAPTIVE PARTNER SITE