KIDS
7-DAY FREE TRIAL
SEARCH
LOGIN
ARTICLES
IMAGES & VIDEOS
ANIMAL KINGDOM
ACTIVITIES
BIOGRAPHIES DICTIONARY COMPARE COUNTRIES WORLD ATLAS PODCAST
animal
View article for
:
Kids Students Scholars
The blue whale is the largest animal on Earth.
Nature Picture Library/SuperStock
Related Articles
Introduction
Animals are living things. Like plants, animals need food and water to live. Unlike plants, which make their own food, animals feed themselves by eating plants or other animals. Animals can also sense what goes on around them. Their bodies allow them to move in reaction to their surroundings. They use their senses and movement to find food, mates, and safety.
Millions of different kinds of animals live on Earth. Animals are found throughout the world, from the freezing polar zones to the hottest deserts. They live on land and in the water. They come in a huge variety of shapes and sizes.
Scientists divide animals into two main groups. Animals that have a backbone are called vertebrates. Animals that do not have a backbone are called invertebrates. About 95 percent of all animals are invertebrates.
Invertebrates
Some invertebrates have a soft, unprotected body—for example, sponges, jellyfish, and worms. Most soft-bodied invertebrates have no legs. Many live in water, but some worms live on land.
Other invertebrates have a covering to protect their body. Animals called echinoderms—for example, starfish and sea urchins—have tough skin covered in stiff points. These animals all live in oceans. Many mollusks, including oysters and snails, have a hard shell around their soft body. Some mollusks live on land, but many live in water.
Invertebrates with jointed legs are called arthropods. They have a hard covering called an exoskeleton. Insects, spiders, crustaceans, and centipedes are all arthropods. Arthropods live on land and in water all over the world.
Vertebrates
Fish are the oldest known vertebrates. They live in water and are often covered in scales. Most fish have a bony skeleton. However, sharks and rays have a skeleton made of cartilage, a strong and flexible tissue.
Animals that live part of their life on land and part of their life in water are called amphibians. Frogs and salamanders are examples of amphibians. Most young amphibians live in water and breathe with gills. As they grow they form lungs and legs and move onto land.
The first vertebrates to live completely on land were reptiles—for example, lizards, snakes, and crocodiles. Reptiles have dry, scaly skin. Some reptiles, such as turtles, spend a lot of time in water, but they breathe air.
Vertebrates that have wings and feathers are called birds. Most, but not all, birds can fly.
Vertebrates that feed their babies with milk from the mother are called mammals. Mammals include mice, deer, seals, whales, monkeys, and humans. Mammals live on land in all parts of the world. A few types, such as whales, live in the ocean but still must breathe air.
Did You Know?
Animals evolved in the seas. They moved into fresh water and onto land more than 350 million years ago.
About Us
Contact Us
Privacy Notice
Terms of Use
Diversity
©2024 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
BY CONTINUING TO USE THIS SITE, YOU CONSENT TO THE TERMS OF OUR COOKIE POLICY, WHICH CAN BE FOUND IN OUR PRIVACY NOTICE.
×