Home Blog Join Mood Boards Makers Eco Shop About Contact BARBULIANNO All Posts Earth Friendly Biophilic Design Plants Eco Escapes Barbulianno © Projects More Barbulianno Sep 26, 2019 17 Tips to Make your Home feel Cosy and Inviting on a Budget Updated: Sep 19, 2022 I've always gravitated toward cosy and warm spaces, much like a fairytale land with lots of candles, layers of soft blankets and, of course, the fairy lights. Intuitively, very often, to cosy up our home, we are implementing elements from nature, and the more we do so, the more it feels like living in a big warm hug of nature. You don't have to spend a fortune on redecorating for every season. It's enough if you make a few small, thoughtful changes, and it will still make a massive difference. So I made for you a list of affordable yet stylish examples of how to make your home cosier by repurposing the things you already own or choosing the new decor pieces wisely. 17 Tips to Create a Warm and Cosy Home 1. Add Texture Adding a few cosy pieces like blankets and cushions in warmer neutral tones is the easiest way to instantly warm up the room. Here are a few examples you can find on Etsy: Beige Boho Pillow Cover | Monochrome Woven Cushion Cover | Cotton Throw Pillow Cover | Cotton Cushion in Rust Orange If you want to invest in that one evergreen blanket that will suit every season, a piece like the Luxe Weighted Cotton Blanket is a great option. Shop the blanket on aeyla.co.uk Luxe Cotton Knit Weighted Blanket, Aeyla My top four affordable blanket finds on Etsy: Tassels Blanket in Rust Colour | Beige Moroccan Tassels Blanket | Merino Wool Throw | Waffle Linen Throw Blanket 2. Opt For a Soft Rug Even if you add only one area rug, it will still significantly impact any room. Choose natural materials like wool, cotton, and jute. It will give the space a relaxed and warm feeling. Handwoven Moroccan Wool Rug, Etsy Shop the rug on Etsy. If the room feels too cold, you can always add a pop of warmer colour to create an atmosphere. This hand tufted wool rug in pink will to the trick. Hand Tufted Wool Rug, Wayfair Shop the rug on Wayfair. 3. Add Candles Soy candle, Etsy The smell is everything. It can make you feel certain ways. And choosing the right scent can be overwhelming. Candles are a natural, non-toxic way to add warmth and happiness to your home. My personal fave is anything with Bergamot. It reminds me of summer nights, and nothing can beat that. Hand-poured in small batches in Walthamstow, this Aromatherapy Bergamot Soy Candle is bursting with sweet citrus aromas. Shop the candle on Etsy. If you prefer good old classics like cinnamon or pumpkin notes, this Etsy soy candle might be your new fave: Pumpkin Spice Vegan Candle, Etsy Shop the candle on Etsy. 4. Fairy lights Teardrop Fairy Lights, Etsy I usually keep them throughout the year because why not? Not really a hopeless romantic here; I just love how it adds a sprinkle of magic to the room. Autumn and winter are the perfect time of the year when you can pretty much go overboard with it, and no one will judge you. ;) Shop the teardrop fairy lights on Etsy. If you are looking for even more magic and bring the stars closer, starburst fairy lights are the way to go. Starburst Chain Lights, Etsy 5. Make Your Memories Count Handmade Frames, Etsy Create a beautiful gallery wall with your own photos—something to keep you smiling on rainy days. To make your memories pop, opt for frames in natural wood or white colour frames. Shop the solid wood frame set on Etsy. 6. Style A Bookshelf Like A Pro If you are looking for one most effective way to cosy up your home, a bookshelf is a great choice. No matter what your vibe is, here are a few elements you could apply to any style: wood tones, real plants, matching book covers, a personal piece of décor, maybe a candle and a string of fairy lights. Read this post if you would like to learn how to style a bookshelf like a designer. Sustainable Oak Bookshelf by KONK is a great example: Overhang Shelving - KONK, Etsy If you don't have much space to play with, ladder-style shelving is a great alternative. Ladder-Style Oak Shelving, La Redoute Shop the shelving on La Redoute. 7. Upgrade Your Bedding Organic Eucalyptus Bundle, Ethical Bedding If you haven't already, start with the quality bedding in pure white and add layers of soft cotton/wool throw and blankets. Whenever possible, opt for eco-friendly fabrics. Shop the organic eucalyptus silk bedding on Ethical Bedding. Snug as a bug with these ridiculously soft blankets: Wool Blend Blanket, H&M Shop the blanket on H&M. Crinkled Cotton Blanket, H&M Add contrast with crinkled cotton blanket in dark caramel. Shop the blanket on H&M. RELATED: Top 15 Eco- Friendly Bedding Picks For Healthier Sleep. 8. Add Plants Fiddle Leaf Fig, Foli8 Regardless of the season, plants always breath in cosiness to your home. Adding plants will not only reduce air toxins but make your home feel lived-in and loved. If you're looking for a fast-growing easy to maintain - Monstera Deliciosa, Pothos or Areca Palm tree are great options. Shop beautiful plants in compostable pots at Foli8. RELATED: How to Choose the Best Indoor Plants Jungle In A Windowless Bathroom, Dream or Reality? 9. Consider Warm Lighting Savannah Floor Lamp, Wayfair Light can undoubtedly change the vibe of a room. You can cosy lighting in a few ways - get some lovely lamps, floodlights, ceiling pendants or dimmers. However, when it comes to the light bulb, the best choice would be a warm white LED light. Shop the Savannah Lamp on Wayfair. For that unconventional look, you might like the Balance Lamp by Blott Works: Handmade Balance Lamp, Blott Works RELATED: TOP 5 Benefits of Using LED Lighting In Interior Design 10. Upgrade Windows with Curtains Farmhouse Window Drapes - Magic Linen, Etsy Maximise natural light and create ultimate cosy vibes with sheer curtains. It will capture those shorter days and boost your mood by maximising natural daylight. Opt for natural fabrics like cotton, linen, eucalyptus or bamboo. Shop Linen Curtain on Etsy. 11. Rearrange The Furniture Handcrafted Ottoman, Twisted Loom The layout can make a room feel cramped if not done right. Create a socialising zone by rearranging the soft furniture facing each other and placing an area rug in the middle. You could add a few ottomans for extra seating if you have enough room. Shop the sustainable handcrafted ottoman by Twisted Loom. 12. Add a Faux-fur of Teddy Fleece Throw Fuzzy Faux Fur Throw, Amazon Place it on the back of the chair, and there you have it, a stylish reading nook. Shop the throw on Amazon. If you fancy more of a soft milky texture, Cosy Bliss Faux fur might be your cup of tea: Soft Faux Rabbit Fur Throw, Amazon 13. Incorporate Wood Oak Bedside Table, La Redoute Natural material like wood instantly warms a room, even if you add just a hint with a few reclaimed wood decorative pieces. But if you fancy going more prominent, you could incorporate wood elements throughout with wooden flooring, dining table, ceiling pendant, wood bench, a coffee table or wood shelving. Shop the Oak Bedside Table on La Redoute. 14. Choose Warmer Tones For The Walls Pick milky shades that evoke cosy feelings. Colours like off white, beige, rust, cinnamon, tan and similar. Check out Frenchic for Eco-Friendly paint options. Read here about how colour of the walls affects your mood. 15. Add a Fluffy Bathroom Mat Give your feet a softer dock after a long warm bath with the Bambo Rug, 100% organic and sustainable so both your feet and your soul feel good. Hug Rug, Bamboo Mat - Natural Collection 16. Incorporate Decorative Baskets Search for handmade baskets with a rustic, organic look. It can be as small as a fruit basket or a big storage basket to keep a spare blanket. Rundi Seagrass Basket - Nkuku If you fancy seeing more of Eco-friendly Handmade decor take a look at some of my top picks. 17. Upgrade Towels Bamboo Towels, Etsy There is nothing more comforting than fresh fluffy towels. To keep them nice and soft for longer, I usually like leaving the fancy ones out as decor and use the not-so-pretty ones daily. Yup, that's totally normal. I could easily be Monica from Friends with 11 towel categories. Shop the bamboo towels on Etsy. How To Make Each Room Feel Extra Cosy Now that we have the important bits covered, lets not leave it to imagination and give some real examples (P.S. pay attention to the mentioned elements). Every tip can apply to different interior styles and it will still add the same cosiness factor to each of them. 1. Living Room Image via This Mama Style If you fancy getting this look, here are a few pieces to get you started: Ceiling Pendant, Nkuku | Moroccan Rug, Etsy | Handwoven Cotton Throw, Etsy | Tan Cushion, Etsy | Monochrome Cushion Cover, Etsy | African wall baskets, Etsy | Handwoven Rattan Tray, Etsy 2. Bedroom Image Source If you like the vibes, here are a few pieces to get you started: Handwoven Moroccan Area Rug, Etsy | Mustard Aura Vase, Bombinate | Sun and Moon Abstract Art, Etsy | Ceiling Pendant, Etsy | Ladder Shelving, Etsy | Linen Pillow Covers, Etsy Seagrass Basket, Etsy Earthy tones and lots of texture is a another great way to achieve a cosiness. Image - Urban Outfitters via The Nordroom Get the vibes: Straw Suspension, Etsy | Macrame Wall Hanging | Handmade Rattan Chair, Etsy | Dot Pillow Cover, Etsy | Wool Cushion Cover, Natural Collection | Rattan Coffee Table, Etsy | Linen Cushion Cover, Etsy If you fancy seeing more abstract art, take a look at our wall art shop. 3. Kitchen Image Source Guess what, to achieve this look it's enough if you include a few key pieces: Handmade Oak Tray, Etsy | Black Chrome Carbonator, Bombinate | Jambo Jute Rug, Nkuku | Oak Breakfast Bar Table, Etsy | Oak Chopping Board, Wearth London | Bar Stool, Etsy | Seagrass Basket, Etsy Bohemian Style Kitchen Image via Wit & Delight Get the boho vibes: Indian Wool Rug, Natural Collection | Eco-Friendly Bowl, Wearth London | Earthy Sisal Basket Etsy | African Wall Basket, Etsy | Ceiling Wood Pendant, Etsy | Devi's Ivy Plant, Patch Plants 4. Bathroom Image Via Matchness Cosy up your bathroom with these cuties: Rattan Mirror, Etsy | Linen Waffle Towels | Braided Hemp Floor Runner, Nkuku | Seagrass Laundry Basket Large, Made.com | Seagrass Laundry Basket Small, Made.com | Wooden Tray Esty | Rattan Coffee Table, Made.com | Decorative Ladder, Nkuku If you're still unsure where to start, why not save the image to your Pinterest board for later. Other articles you might enjoy: Autumn Inspired Sustainable Living Room Design Rattan Furniture Trend Nailing That Natural Effortless Look How to Completely Transform your Bedroom With just a Few Items Make Your Bedroom Look More Luxurious For Free How to Decorate Your Rented Apartment Without Breaking the Bank Top 10 Places To Buy Plants Online In the UK How to Make Your small Apartment Look Bigger Once you're done with decorating, make yourself a cup of tea and enjoy your favourite movie under a cosy blanket. Don't forget to enjoy the little things in life. Have a wonderful week lovelies! Love, Barbulianno (P.S. follow Barbulianno on Instagram) #cosyhomedecor #homedecor #cosydecortips #howtomakehomecosy #cosydecorideas This article does contain affiliate links. I may receive a small commission when you click the above links and make purchases (at no extra cost to you). I try my best to keep things fair and balanced, in order to help you make the best choice for you. Know someone that will love it? SHARE IT! :) 16,301 views 20 Recent Posts See All Top 10 Japandi Furniture Finds on Etsy 1,505 10 Made to Last Sustainable Japandi Furniture | Handcrafted at Oragi 544