INVESTING SIMULATOR BANKING PERSONAL FINANCE NEWS REVIEWS ACADEMY LIVE Table of Contents 1. Looking at More Than You Can Afford 2. Skipping Mortgage Pre-Approval 3. Acting Too Soon 4. Acting Alone 5. Lacking Vision 6. Overlooking Flaws 7. Ignoring the Neighborhood 8. Rushing an Offer 9. Dragging Your Feet 10. Offering Too Much 11. Neglecting to Inspect 12. Getting Desperate FAQs The Bottom Line ALTERNATIVE INVESTMENTS REAL ESTATE INVESTING Top 12 House-Hunting Mistakes Don't underestimate your feelings or overestimate your finances By AMY FONTINELLE Updated March 25, 2024 Reviewed by ERIKA RASURE Fact checked by SKYLAR CLARINE Buying a home can be stressful. Since homeownership has far-reaching implications, it's important to keep your emotions in check and make the most rational decision possible. Finding a home at a price you can afford is likely your goal, so it's important to avoid these house-hunting mistakes. KEY TAKEAWAYS Be realistic about what you can afford, and tailor your search accordingly. Jumping in too fast or waiting too long to put in an offer are both risky in terms of cost and what kind of property you might end up with. Use the resources of a realtor or agent to search for homes or attend open houses. 1. Looking at More Than You Can Afford If you can't or won't be able to afford the house you've found, you're just hurting yourself by imagining yourself in it. Restrict your house shopping to properties in your financial range. Start your search at the low end of your price range. Remember, when you spend another $10,000 to buy a home, you're not just paying an extra $10,000; you're paying an extra $10,000 plus interest with your mortgage. 2. Skipping Mortgage Pre-Approval What you think you can afford and what the bank is willing to lend you may not match up, especially if you have poor credit or unstable income. Make sure to be pre-approved for a loan before placing an offer on a home—or even before you go house-hunting in earnest. If you don't, you'll be wasting the seller's time, the seller's agent's time, and your agent's time if you sign a contract and then discover later that the bank won't lend you what you need. Be aware that even if you have been pre-approved for a mortgage, your loan can fall through if you do something to alter your credit score, such as finance a car purchase. If your actions cause the deal to die, you may have to forfeit any deposit or earnest money you put up when entering the contract. Mortgage lending discrimination is illegal. If you think you've been discriminated against based on race, religion, sex, marital status, use of public assistance, national origin, disability, or age, there are steps you can take. One such step is to file a report to the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau or with the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). 3. Acting Too Soon You'll probably have to make some compromises to be able to afford your first home but don't make a compromise that will be a significant strain. Unless you are a high-end buyer looking at custom homes, the chances are that you will be able to find a selection of homes in your price range. Being open to continuing your search will save you from rash decisions you might regret later. Many real estate websites can help you streamline the house-hunting process, making it possible to preview hundreds of homes within a few hours from the comfort of your couch. 4. Acting Alone Don't walk into an open house without a real estate agent or broker. Agents are held to the ethical rule that they must act in both the seller's and the buyer's best interests. You may not be in the best bargaining position if you start dealing with a seller's agent before having one of your own. Roughly 86% of buyers use a real estate agent or broker, according to a 2022 survey from the National Association of Realtors. 1 New rules for the National Association of Realtors, expected to take effect in July 2024, may lower commissions for home buyers and sellers. If a federal court approves the changes, the standard 6% commission ends and sellers no longer have to propose compensation to prospective buyers and their agents. NAR will also require brokers to enter into written agreements with their buyers to help consumers understand what services will be provided, and at what cost. 2 5. Lacking Vision Distinguishing between what's fixable and what is not is important. Even if you can't afford to replace that hideous wallpaper in the bathroom right now, it might be worth it in exchange for getting into a house you can afford. If the home meets your needs in terms of location and size, don't let physical imperfections turn you away. At the same time, don't be fooled by minor upgrades and cosmetic fixes that sellers have staged. Doing home upgrades yourself, even with a contractor, is often cheaper than paying the increased home value to a seller who has already done the work for you. 6. Overlooking Flaws Look for homes whose full potential has yet to be realized, especially if you're on a strict budget. Don't buy a fixer-upper that's more than you can handle in terms of time, money, or ability. If you think you can do the work yourself but realize you can't once you get started, any repairs or upgrades you plan to make should be in your budget. 7. Ignoring the Neighborhood Don't just focus on the residence—look at the surrounding area. It's impossible to predict the future of your chosen neighborhood, but you should consider: What kind of development plans are in the works for the neighborhood? Is the street likely a popular rush-hour shortcut? Is there talk of a bridge or a highway to be built? What are the zoning laws in the area? Is there a lot of undeveloped land around? What is likely to get built there? Have home values in the neighborhood been declining or rising? 8. Rushing an Offer It may be necessary to make an offer fast if you find a home you like in a hot market. However, don't neglect the necessary steps, such as ensuring the neighborhood feels safe at night and investigating noise issues like a nearby train. Taking the time to weigh your decision allows you to research how much the property is worth and offer a reasonable price. 9. Dragging Your Feet It's a tough balancing act to make sure you make a careful decision, but don't take too long to make it. The more time and energy you have to take out of your everyday activities to search for a house, the less time and energy you have available to meet other obligations. If you don't pull the trigger quickly, someone else might, and you'll have to keep looking. Don't underestimate how time-consuming and routine-disrupting house shopping can be. 10. Offering Too Much It's easy for buyers to get sucked into a bidding war. If the house doesn't appraise at or above the amount of your offer, the bank won't give you the loan unless the seller reduces the price or you pay cash for the difference. When you sell the house, if market conditions are similar to or worse than when you purchased, you may find yourself upside down on the mortgage and unable to sell. Make sure the purchase price for the home you buy is reasonable for both the house and the location by examining comparable sales and getting your agent's opinion before making an offer. 11. Neglecting to Inspect You found the perfect place, the offer was accepted, and you're in contract. It's tempting to think you're a homeowner the moment you go into escrow but hold on. Before you close, you need to know the condition of the house. That's why you need a thorough inspection of the property and your mortgage lender might demand it. Keeping your feelings in check until you have a complete picture of the house's physical condition and the soundness of your potential investment will help you avoid making a serious financial mistake. 12. Getting Desperate When you've been looking for a while, and you do not see anything you like—or worse, you're getting outbid on the houses you do want—it's easy to get desperate to find your new home now. If you have time, wait until something suits you. If your demands are realistic for your budget, find something you can live with. New houses come on the market every day. Is It Hard to Buy a House? It takes time, effort, and, money to buy a home. However, it doesn't have to be difficult. Using a realtor and having a game plan in mind from financials to the type of home you want to buy can be a rewarding and exciting experience. Should I Buy a Fixer-Upper Home? It may be easier for a first-time homebuyer to purchase a home that needs some work. Fixer-uppers tend to be less expensive to buy but pricey to restore. If you are handy or have the time and money to craft your dream home out of a run-down house, it can be worth it. Why Is Location Important? Location can determine the value of real estate. Homes in cities with little room for expansion tend to be more valuable. Buyers should consider the accessibility, appearance, and amenities of a neighborhood along with future development plans. The Bottom Line Buying a house is a big decision and buyers need to ensure they are making rational choices. A prepared buyer can protect themselves from costly mistakes and shop with confidence. ARTICLE SOURCES PART OF The Complete Homebuying Guide Top 12 House-Hunting Mistakes 3 of 40 How to Choose the Right Real Estate Broker 4 of 40 The Differences Between a Real Estate Agent, a Broker, and a Realtor 5 of 40 Do You Need a Lawyer to Buy a House? 6 of 40 Related Articles 10 Tips for Getting a Fair Price on a Home 8 Tips for Recession House Hunters The Differences Between a Real Estate Agent, a Broker, and a Realtor Real Estate Open Houses Might Not Be an Effective Sales Tool How to Get a Mortgage While Managing Student Loan Debt Buying a Home Remotely: A Step-By-Step Guide Partner Links Related Terms How Escrow Protects Parties in Financial Transactions Escrow broadly refers to a third party that holds money or an asset on behalf of the other two parties in a transaction. more What Is a Mortgage? Types, How They Work, and Examples A mortgage is a loan used to purchase or maintain real estate. more Real Estate Agent: Definition, How Agents Work, and Compensation A real estate agent is a licensed professional representing buyers or sellers in real estate transactions. more Listing Broker: Meaning, Responsibilities, Qualifications A listing broker or listing agent helps you list and sell your home. Learn what a listing broker does and when you might need one. more Open House: Definition, How It Works, Advantages & Disadvantages Open houses are periods of time in which houses or other dwellings are available to be viewed by potential buyers. more What Is a Short Sale on a House? Process, Alternatives, and Mistakes to Avoid In real estate, a short sale is an asking price for a home that is less than the amount that is due on its existing mortgage. more About Us Terms of Service Dictionary Editorial Policy Advertise News Privacy Policy Contact Us Careers EU Privacy # A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Investopedia is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family. Please review our updated Terms of Service.