sales@duplus.co.uk Call The Team Today On 0116 2610 710 Search Checkout My Account £0.00 0 All Rooflights Technical Support News About Us Contact Us Brochure Quote Designed & Manufactured In The UK Free UK Delivery (Exclusions Apply*) 40 Ways To Make Your Home Look And Feel More Luxurious February 7, 2022 With the apparent shift in us working in our homes more than ever before, even with the easing of restrictions, homeowners and homeworkers are rapidly turning to home improvements to ensure their increasingly frequent surrounding is as enjoyable place as possible to reside. This appears to have increased further with the ending of the stamp duty holiday, reducing the rush to move versus improve. For some, this is simple painting and decorating, replacing worn furniture, and adding a few luxuries. However, for others this is something slightly more dramatic. Major improvements such as extensions, internal renovations, and garden buildings appear to be sharply on the rise. With this in mind, we collaborated with nine experts to discuss 40 ways that people can make their homes look and feel more luxurious – from affordable finishing touches to bigger renovations and installations. Read on to find out more… ‘Affordable’ Finishing Touches There are plenty of ‘affordable’ finishing touches which can make your home look and feel more luxurious – some of which can actually be free! Paint a feature wall Paint a feature wall with a mural – if you’re arty you could paint something more complicated but if you’re not confident with your creativity or you’re short on time a few geometric shapes plotted out and painted in can look amazing to create a designer-looking focal point. Even a simple rectangle that highlights a gallery wall in a bold colour can look stunning. Cost is a tester pot of paint or two depending on the number of colours you decide to use: can be £1-10. Go big with wall art Art doesn’t have to be expensive, but it can look it – wall art can help to completely tie a room together. Find a statement art piece and hang it on your wall. This will have a big impact. Be sure to choose art that fits in well with the rest of the décor in the room. For example, if your room has a traditional feel to it, an abstract pop-art painting will probably stick out like a sore thumb. You can find inexpensive, fun pieces at your local charity shops if you keep your eye out. Wall art tends to cost around £10-£100 each on average. Redecorate / paint Painting and decorating your home can completely transform the look and feel of your living space. Redecorate using a calm or colourful interior scheme depending on your tastes. If you’re looking to save money, you can choose to paint and decorate the space yourself, in which case, you will only need to pay for the materials such as paint, wallpaper, brushes, rollers, etc. However, many people choose to hire a professional to decorate their home for them to ensure it’s finished to the highest quality possible. The average cost to hire someone to paint and decorate your entire home is around £1,500-£4,500. The prices will vary depending on the materials you choose, your location in the UK, and the size of your home. Use colour cleverly The feeling of space is what everyone wants when they extend but you don’t necessarily need to get an extension to achieve that. You can more affordably expose your timber floorboards and paint them and your skirting, or even your whole wall the same colour. One of the simplest ways to make your home look luxurious (and expensive) is to just use neutral colours, for both paint and furniture. Lighter colours give a more spacious look than darker colours but whichever colour you choose using the same colour on floor, skirting and walls makes the edges less obvious so the space will look bigger. The prices will vary depending on what paint brand you use, but to sand and paint your floorboards it will cost around £20 per square meter. Declutter Say no to clutter in your house. Ask yourself do you really need this particular item? When you live in a house for so long, clutter can start to grow without you even noticing. If you can’t throw things away, then look for some chic baskets and bins to help get your clutter organised. Decorate with candles and mirrors Luxury is all about attention to detail and comfort, and appealing to all the senses is a good place to start – such as scented candles or diffusers. Candles add substance, style, elegance, and class to any space. Additionally, adding mirrors to your walls can help to improve the feeling of luxury within the home. Not only do mirrors look great, but they also help light flow through the room and can ultimately turn a dull, lifeless room into a beautiful, bright, and inviting space. Add house plants and flowers Displaying flowers and plants in your room will give it an instant facelift. Plus, plants can make you feel good as well as lift a drab space and create a luxurious and exotic look. Find a favourite vase and add a colourful bouquet. If you have green-fingered friends who could give you cuttings from their plant, then you can do this for the cost of a bit of compost. A beautiful plant pot can be a lot more expensive than the plant, but you can use a large food tin and paint it with some chalk paint for a lower cost option that looks at home with the rest of your room decor. You don’t need to worry about using real plants if you don’t have a green thumb, but just try to avoid any plastic-looking fake plants (you’ll easily be able to tell the difference). Costs can range from free to £40, depending on how DIY you go. Update your glassware and tableware While it’s only a very small section of the entire home, adding tableware to your dining space can help to make the area seem much more luxurious. Stylish or pretty glassware and tableware, along with linen napkins, makes a meal more of an occasion. Tableware items such as bowls, plates and mats can be purchased in a range of colours, patterns, and styles. Take a look at your space and choose a tableware set that compliments the colour scheme and design of the room. You can purchase complete sets of tableware for around £18-£80, depending on the design, brand, and quality of the items included. Dress your windows Window treatments can make a huge impact and a set of custom curtains can set you back a pretty penny, but you can get a luxurious look by layering a blind and extra-long sheers. Depending on your style and if you need a blackout result you could use a simple plain blackout roller blind, or you could get a more romantic bohemian digital nomad look with a bamboo blind. The key is to hang your curtain pole high up on the ceiling to get the long draping sheers. A blackout roller blind will cost around £10-15, bamboo roller blinds are typically between £10-20, a curtain pole is approximately £15-£30, and long sheers range from £3.50-£20. Layer rugs Layer rugs to update your floor. To get a large enough rug you can get smaller (and lower cost) rugs and sew them together or use carpet binding tape. Small cotton rugs can typically cost around £10 each – however, you might need between 4-6 for a larger space, and possibly want to layer these over a more textured rug like a shag pile (£20), so costs can quickly increase. Replace your bedding and towels When you are looking for cheap and easy ways to make your home look and feel more luxurious, one of the best ways to do this is to upgrade your duvet sets. Good quality bed linen and fluffy towels are also always appreciated. Grey and silver are in-style right now and having a shine on your duvet sets will make your home look more luxurious instantly. The prices will vary depending on how many bedrooms and bathrooms are in your home, as well as which brand and size you decide to purchase from. Upcycle A great way to make a home feel more luxurious is with an upcycle. You may have a piece of furniture that you’ve had for a while and has simply gone out of style, something you’ve inherited and don’t want to part with but doesn’t fit your decor or you can source something. A lot of old furniture can have really dark heavy finishes but underneath that can be some truly stunning wood – there are some amazing products on the market that allow you to keep this wood exposed. Adding texture or pattern to part of the piece is another great way to update furniture. Replace the centre panel in a cupboard door with some hessian to contrast the sleek lines of the wood or add a pattern to take your piece up a level. Straight lines or geometric patterns work well, their crisp lines really work to add a sense of luxury. When you have your piece finished and perfect, staging it and lighting can have a huge impact on its overall look. Remember to add greenery, work in threes with accessories and add height and texture to truly set you piece off, remember don’t be tempted to over clutter it though. Social media marketplaces is a great place to find furniture at incredible prices and sometimes you can even be lucky enough to find the perfect item for free. Stains and waxes can be picked up from DIY stores for around £10-£20, and good quality furniture paint starts from only £20. Consider your lighting Good lighting is essential and can really make a difference to the look and mood of a home. In particular, having a good light to read by can add another touch of luxury to your home. As well as ceiling and wall lights, table lamps and floor lamps can make quite a design statement, allowing for touches of colour and texture. Built-in LED lighting in areas such as the kitchen countertops can also be a great finishing touch. The average cost for ceiling lights is around £10-£100 per light fitting, depending on the style and design that you choose. Table lamps tend to cost around £10-£80 on average, standing lamps are around £50-£150, and built-in LED lighting tends to cost around £100-£300. Add neon touches Brightening up your home with an LED neon sign is a great way to add a little luxe to your space without spending too much money. They look great in any room of the house and come in various colours and styles. Adding a simple neon word sign onto a fun, wallpaper-covered wall is a great way to make your space look and feel more opulent, or turn your home bar into an opulent oasis. Look for items with ‘bling’, ‘frosting’, and metallic touches Choosing items that may feature a bit of “bling” or “frosting” (as they say in Essex) can give that glamorous luxury feel. Also, metallic finished – such as chrome and rose gold – can also add that touch of class. If you already have picture frames, mirror frames, plant pots, trays, and other bits and bobs and don’t want to go out and buy all brand-new items, then turn them gold. This is a big look that can be easy on the wallet. Buy a can of gold spray to update all these items and you will instantly add a bit of glamour to any room. Replace hardware There are some easy and incredibly affordable ways to update furniture, and a simple update of handles is a quick and inexpensive update which can have a huge impact. Black hardware is replacing the typical chrome finish we’ve all been used to for so long, and gold or brass coloured hardware has also made a real revival and is bang on trend. Likewise, a rich brass or worn antique handle can really add depth and warmth and really change the