Make an account to save your favorites about shop RECIPES HOME HOLIDAYS HOME DESIGN GUIDES, DECOR & TIPS 12 Steps to a Cozy Home by Julie Blanner updated Feb 29, 2024 SAVE Content may contain affiliate links. When you shop the links, we receive a small commission at no cost to you. Thanks for supporting my small business. Get all the tips for creating a warm and cozy home, even if you’re a minimalist. You’ll find creative, inexpensive ideas for creating the ultimate cozy living vibes without bringing in too much “stuff”. A cozy home is one that feels welcoming, comfortable and warm. You can achieve a cozy aesthetic no matter your personal design style or taste – learn the secrets! want to save this? Enter your email below and I’ll send it directly to your inbox! EMAIL SAVE I’ve always gravitated toward warm and cozy spaces, much like those in Nancy Meyers films (Something’s Gotta Give, Father of the Bride, The Holiday, and so many more). That’s because whether the spaces are light or dark, they are thoughtful and feel so lived-in and loved. A cozy home is often created over time, and with careful effort. I have realized over my years of decorating both our St. Louis home and our Modern Lake House, that a few things always help create the look I’m after. Welcoming, soft, and uncluttered, but thoughtful! An Instagram follower once commented and said “I just love how you are able to make your spaces so cozy and minimal simultaneously. It’s a talent.” I was so thrilled to hear that, because that’s exactly how I want our home to feel. Calm, cozy, minimal, but warm. Success! How to Create a Cozy Home Is it possible to live minimally, but still have your home feel warm and cozy? My answer is absolutely. You don’t have to bring in too much extra stuff just to create a welcoming house! Before we jump to our favorite cozy home inspiration, here are a few tips, tricks and answers to commonly asked questions. Frequently Asked Questions What does cozy mean when it comes to home decorating? Generally, the term cozy references a warm, comfortable and welcoming environment. It can also refer to the size of a space – cozy can be a kinder way of saying that a room is small, but still warm and welcoming. What’s a budget friendly way to create a cozy home? Many of the ideas in this cozy home guide are budget friendly! From the tips about art work, to changing your pillow covers, you’ll be surprised how many ideas are super affordable – and even free. Tips Instead of bringing in more stuff, simply change items out seasonally. This goes for pillow covers, candles, and even the wreath on your front door and artwork on your walls. Cozy means welcoming for many people. If you’re inviting guests, light the candles, start a fire, and turn on all your lamps. Instant cozy vibes! Clutter is just that… clutter. While you want your home to be comfortable, clean surfaces are always the best start! Find my best Decluttering Tips here. 12 Steps to Create a Warm and Cozy Home Here are a few simple ways to instantly help you create a cozy home. Choose a Warm Wall Color I’ve broken down my favorite Warm Whites, Mushroom Paint Colors and Greige Paint Colors for you! Pssst… gray by nature is cool, so if you want your home to feel warm, use a warm paint color. I also prefer an eggshell or satin sheen because flat feels… well, flat to me. You often see it used in office buildings with stark white walls and basic gray carpet, which doesn’t exactly evoke that cozy feeling. Read more about Paint Sheens here. Having “white” paint doesn’t mean your home has to feel stark. Incorporate Wood Any amount of wood integrated into your home adds warmth. Incorporate wood on a large scale with hardwood floors, cabinets, furniture or door. Decorative accents like trays, bowls and frames can add little hints throughout your home. Layer with Rugs Layering rugs on carpet, wood, tile and other flooring adds a layer of warmth – especially on solid surfaces. In addition to warmth the rug you select can add interest, texture, warmth and function! These are a few of my favorite styles: Favorite Rug Styles DESIGN GUIDES, DECOR & TIPS Pet Friendly Rug SAVE DESIGN GUIDES, DECOR & TIPS Custom Sisal Rugs You Can Clean SAVE DESIGN GUIDES, DECOR & TIPS Antique and Vintage Turkish Rugs SAVE DESIGN GUIDES, DECOR & TIPS Traditional Rugs SAVE Ultimate Rug Guide DESIGN GUIDES, DECOR & TIPS The Ultimate Rug Guide Get the secrets to help make a rug purchase so easy! Find out how to narrow down your choices based on size, color, material and durability. This rug shopping guide makes the process simple and yes… even fun! Read More SAVE Add Texture There are so many ways to incorporate texture in your home! Furniture – Grasscloth coffee table or side table, rattan bar stools, rattan bar cart or rattan bed, and the fabric of a slipcovered sofa or chair. Grasscloth Wallpaper Bedding Window Treatments Rugs Pillows Decor Art and Mirrors Lighting Blend Old and New Hey, I love Ikea as much as the next girl, and I’ve certainly bought my fair share of new purchases for our home there. In fact, you can read my posts about shopping for an Ikea sofa vs a Pottery Barn sofa right here. However, one of the most important ways to character to your home is to include vintage or antique pieces! They don’t have to be family heirlooms. In fact, purchasing second hand pieces on Craigslist or in thrift stores can be so rewarding and add so much charm to your home. (Read more about this antique linen cabinet and how we use it for storage right here!) Add Something Organic in Every Room Plants, flowers, fruits and vegetables breathe life into a room. Below are some of my favorites, including where to use and detailed guides to care for them. Easy to Care For Plants easy to care for plants GARDENING & OUTDOORS Olive Tree SAVE GARDENING & OUTDOORS Indoor Lemon Trees SAVE GARDENING & OUTDOORS ZZ Plant Guide SAVE GARDENING & OUTDOORS Fiddle Leaf Fig Tree SAVE Add Pillows and Throws One of the easiest way to change the look, feel, and seasonal style of your room is to change your pillow covers! It’s one of my favorite tricks for a cozy living room, and it’s easy to learn how to mix and match patterns and styles. Blankets and throws are easily accessible throughout our home. Stored in baskets, draped on sofas, chairs or folded in a tray for instant comfort. Hang Art and Pictures at Eye Level This is such an easy change to make in your home! Why does it seem like so much art is hung so high on walls? It should ideally be at eye level, where your family and guests can enjoy the items that are so special to you. This creates an element of instant warmth and comfort in your cozy home, and it invites guests to get to know you and your family’s story more intimately. Get all my best ideas for my favorite Amazon art, free art sources, and find amazing ideas for easy DIY wall decor ideas throughout your home right here! Mix and Match Your furniture doesn’t have to come in a set, and maybe it shouldn’t! It feels so much more interesting to mix and match color, style or both. One of my favorite tricks is to buy furniture that can do double duty because it’s flexible and multipurpose – making it so easy to mix and match. Integrate Warm Metals According to my favorite interior designers, brass is here to stay. Of course, you can clearly see my love for the patina of raw brass throughout these images. There are a variety of ways to bring in warm metals to your home! Search for antique silver plated pieces at thrift stores, add a fresh brass tray to your coffee table or a mirror to your walls. Favorite Brass Hardware KITCHEN & DINING Unlacquered Brass Hardware SAVE DESIGN GUIDES, DECOR & TIPS Unlacquered Brass Faucets SAVE DESIGN GUIDES, DECOR & TIPS Brass Lantern Pendant Lights SAVE DESIGN GUIDES, DECOR & TIPS Brass Door Knobs SAVE Lighting Lighting goes far beyond your overhead fixtures! Consider adding pretty lamps and sconces to your home. Dramatic flames like a fireplace, or even something as simple as candle light to bring all the cozy vibes into your home. Use Warm White Light Bulbs For instant warmth, update your lightbulbs. The right warm lightbulbs will add a beautiful warm glow! You can learn more about our favorite light bulbs that we use throughout our homes at the link above. DESIGN GUIDES, DECOR & TIPS HOME You May Also Like DESIGN GUIDES, DECOR & TIPS Outdoor Pillows SAVE DESIGN GUIDES, DECOR & TIPS Scalloped Home Decor SAVE DESIGN GUIDES, DECOR & TIPS Serena and Lily Look for Less SAVE Leave a comment Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked * COMMENT * NAME EMAIL Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment. 33 Comments Andrea April 11, 2018 at 11:29 am You have great style, thanks for the tips! Are the two stools at the end of the bed still available to purchase some where (shown in 4. Add Texture)? They appear to be just what I’ve been searching for. Reply Julie April 11, 2018 at 11:54 am Thanks, Andrea! They’re available in my shop . I love them so much I added a couple to our lake house family room as well. Reply Elle March 11, 2018 at 4:29 pm I just stumbled on your blog from Inspired By Charm and I’m in love with your style and your philosophy! Just added you to my blog reader and will be following on Insta. Could you share the source for the wonderful open glass vase on your kitchen island? Reply Julie April 10, 2018 at 10:02 am Thank you, Elle, it’s so nice to “meet” you! It’s from Michaels – it was covered in rope and I cut it off because I loved the silhouette of it. Enjoy! Reply Laurie March 1, 2018 at 12:32 pm I just love your house from top to bottom, especially all of the lighting. Could you tell me about how far apart the lights are over your kitchen island? Just wondering if something like that would work in my space. Thank you! Reply Julie May 31, 2018 at 10:25 am Thank you, Laurie! I’m SO sorry I missed this! I shared all of the measurements here. Reply Ellen from Ask Away Blog February 22, 2018 at 7:42 am This is a great post. I am very into minimalism and I always explain it to people by saying that if everything serves a purpose and you don’t hang on to useless stuff, it’s sooo much easier to embrace the concept of it in your home and the rest of your life. Reply Clementine February 21, 2018 at 9:08 pm Really thoughtful tips! Especially 6-9… thank you for sharing… no wonder you’re my favorite. Reply Julie February 22, 2018 at 6:04 am You are too kind, Clementine, thank you Reply NEWER COMMENTS Hi, I'm Julie Blanner, creator of easy, reliable crowd-pleasing recipes you'll crave and the ultimate design guides to create your own retreat at home. LEARN MORE Popular Recipes APPETIZERS Easy Hors d’Oeuvres SAVE RECIPES Simple Sweet Bread 45 mins SAVE PASTA Mexican Spaghetti 1 hr SAVE RECIPES Mini Tacos 30 mins SAVE Trending Home PAINT COLORS, TUTORIALS & TIPS Benjamin Moore White Dove SAVE HOME Eggshell Paint SAVE PAINT COLORS, TUTORIALS & TIPS Sage Green Paint Colors SAVE KITCHEN & DINING Unlacquered Brass Hardware SAVE as seen in RECIPES HOME ABOUT PRIVACY POLICY ©2024 Julie Blanner. All rights reserved. • Powered by CultivateWP. 9115 SHARES Update Privacy Settings