Homes and Gardens THE BEST IN DESIGN, DECORATION AND STYLE GB Edition Subscribe INTERIOR DESIGN ADVICE KITCHENS BATHROOMS CELEBRITY STYLE GARDENS HOME TOURS WHAT TO BUY SOLVED MORE Sign up to our newsletter TRENDING TIMELESS KITCHEN DESIGN PLANTS TO PRUNE IN APRIL HOW TO DEADHEAD DAFFODILS BEST NON-TOXIC AIR FRYERS RUSTIC DECOR IDEAS When you purchase through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission. Here’s how it works. Interior Design Ideas How to make a house look cozy – 8 ways to make a snug home Interior designers offer their advice on how to make a house look cozy and welcoming in the cooler months Sign up to our newsletter (Image credit: David Duchars / Crown / Piglet in Bed) BY CHIANA DICKSON LAST UPDATED 31 OCTOBER 2022 As the cooler months approach and we spend more time at home once again, more people are looking for how to make a house look cozy to hunker down and enjoy the cooler weather. There are countless cozy room ideas to incorporate into your home, but creating a coherent, cozy house can prove more difficult. While cozy living room ideas and cozy bedroom ideas may be more obvious, incorporating cozy decor in other areas requires more thought. Luckily, designers and experts have explained how to make a house look cozy and coherent, so that you can relax in your home no matter the room. Chiana Dickson Junior Editor Chiana has written over 70 articles for Homes & Gardens, many of which focus on home and garden care. She spends her days talking to experienced designers and experts about the latest trends and design ideas which she shares with H&G's readers so they can style their homes to perfection. As we approach fall, Chiana is turning her attention to seasonal topics due to her love of the season and its warm tones and cozy interiors. How To Make A House Look Cozy ‘When you really think about it, creating a cozy home is essentially making yourself a warm and comfortable cocoon for you to hibernate in during the winter months when it's cold and stormy outside,’ defines Rhiannon Johns, trained interior designer, and brand manager at Piglet in Bed. ‘So in contrast to the hotter summer months, where you want your space to feel as light, airy, and open as possible, creating coziness is all about adding elements that make your home actually feel a bit smaller.’ LATEST VIDEOS FROM HOMESANDGARDENS 1. Style A Cozy Bedroom (Image credit: Piglet in Bed) Although more obvious, looking to make a bedroom cozy is one of the best ways to add a cozy feel to your home. ‘When it comes to the snuggle factor we like to ramp it up to eleven, so double up your throws by layering different textures; velvet and linen is a great pairing,’ suggests Georgia Metcalfe, founder of French Bedroom. ‘Complement the vintage patterned beds and cushions with nostalgic black and white photos of special moments. ‘Your bedroom should be your personal sanctuary. Dress your bed in patterns that make your heart sing, such as ditsy blooms or ruffles and frills. Add some simple extra touches, such as seasonal flowers, soft lighting, candles, and cushions, and create a room that feels like a hug every time you walk in. Opt for bedside lamps rather than wall lights to bring the lighting down, creating a warm and cozy hue,’ she adds. Caitlin O’Keeffe, merchandise field manager at Serena & Lilly suggests an alternative approach, however. ‘Achieving the ultimate cozy bedroom is all about simplicity,’ she argues, ‘swap out your summer whites and brights for gingham sheeting in earthier colors like green or brown. Layer a thick quilted coverlet and a cozy throw at the end of the bed for extra warmth. Complete the look with an oversized lumbar pillow that’s almost as wide as the bed. Always invest in quality bedding for comfort and longevity. ‘Dark and neutral tones and layers with textures come into play this season for the bedroom – all shades of beige, deep olive green for that pop of color, and textured whites are in for fall,’ Caitlin continues. ‘Wallpaper has also made a huge comeback, so don’t be afraid to use wallpaper with texture in the bedroom such as grass cloth or fabric to create a cozy sleeping oasis.’ 2. Warm Your Homes Schemes With Deep Tones (Image credit: Crown) Room color ideas are a great way to make a house feel cozy, especially if you consider fall color schemes to evoke the coziest season. ‘Paint is the quickest and most effective way to add instant impact and change the mood and atmosphere of a room. The darker the color the more light it absorbs – so reds, plumbs, and terracottas will visually bring walls inwards making a room look warm and inviting,’ explains Justyna Korczynska, senior designer at Crown. ‘Any color that is made up primarily of red or orange will make a room seem much warmer. Using two or three of these colors together will create that warm palette with tonal interest. Many think that red and orange clash, but they do in fact work brilliantly together.’ ‘If you want the warmth without the drama, mid-tones are easier to live with. For example, berry tones are warm without being as intense as crimson and the earthy tones of terracotta are much softer than an orange – there’s something so comforting about this color. These mid-tones work equally well in a modern or traditional setting, with light or dark furniture.’ Shades such as these make wonderful additions as colors to make a living room look cozy while also opening the space up and being easy on the eye. ‘Metallic shades are one of the easiest ways to introduce a real warmth into your space. Gold and bronze work wonderfully well texturally as they add also add shine. These deep warm tones are versatile. They look fantastic with sleek surfaces but also with natural materials like exposed brickwork. Often full rooms of metallic paint can be overwhelming, so try feature walls or block of shimmer.’ ‘Deep green can create a variety of moods. Used as an accent, perhaps on a plush velvet sofa, it brings a bolder pop to a neutral space whilst still looking modern and fresh. Used on the walls, it creates a cozy and enveloping atmosphere, while looking timeless and sophisticated.’ 3. Think About How You Paint (Image credit: Little Greene) Besides the color of your paint, considering how you paint your room can also have a drastic effect on the final look and feel of the space and determine how cozy or cold the room ends up. Rhiannon suggests using paint to enclose a space, making it feel smaller but allowing it to cocoon you in lush color. ‘You can achieve this through clever tricks such as painting your ceiling the same color as your walls,’ she says, ‘or alternatively keeping your walls neutral and painting your ceiling a rich tone such as olive green – something that is very on trend at the moment.’ Paint can also be zoned to create cozy corner ideas throughout your home, especially when working with larger or open-plan spaces that you want to visually divide. 4. Select The Best Flooring (Image credit: Brintons) Flooring ideas play a huge part in making a house look cozy. Bare wooden floors or tiles may look and feel cold underfoot unless dressed with a rug. ‘Textured rugs made out of natural materials such as jute will not only keep your feet warm, it will again add another layer of comfort to your house,’ reminds Rhiannon. For a larger-scale renovation, however, carpet ideas may be the way to go for a cozy home. ‘Your carpet is the perfect place to start when creating a cozy living space. The texture of wool underfoot coupled with a warm colour or welcoming pattern makes it the perfect base upon which to shape a comfortable and inviting interior scheme,’ says Lisa Conway, marketing manager at Brintons. ‘Where an alternative flooring like wood or tiles might make a room feel stark and bare, a soft woven wool carpet, layered with accessories in cashmere, mohair and linen will all work to soften the overall look.’ 'Heading into the colder months, layering rugs on either a hard or carpeted floor is a wonderful way of bringing even more warmth, texture, and vibrancy into a space,' Lisa continues. 'To create a balanced scheme, it is important to consider the composition of the colors and patterns that you’re combining, as too many can easily overwhelm a scheme. As a general rule, it is a good idea to pick out just a few colors and run them throughout the rug scheme or use a hue that harmoniously works well as a backdrop such as greys or beiges.' ‘Most importantly, choose a material that provides warmth underfoot,’ adds Jodie Hatton design manager at Brintons. ‘Wool is an excellent choice due to its natural insulating properties. Wool is often thought of as creating a warm and cozy environment which is one of its many benefits, a lesser known benefit is wool’s cooling properties, as an insulator wool can also prevent too much heat from coming through the floor and its moisture wicking properties prevent you from getting too warm.’ 5. Add Dimension Through Layers And Texture (Image credit: Dan Duchars) Layering in interior design has always been important, but it is imperative for making a house look cozy. ‘Add warmth and layers to your space,’ suggests Caitlin, ‘drape ultra-soft alpaca or merino wool throws onto the couch or on the bed for those cooler nights as the weather begins to change. Include even more throws in outdoor spaces to round out the coziness and to make it into a more usable space year-round.’ 'Layers for fall are essential,’ reminds Rhiannon. ‘Soft cotton throws draped over the arm of your sofa and the end of your bed are not only very practical while you’re watching a movie with a hot cup of tea, but they also add texture and depth to a space, having a comfortable effect on the eye.’ ‘Spruce up a fireplace by placing a sheepskin rug on the ground and create a cozy reading nook nearby for warm nights by the fire,’ Caitlin continues. ‘Add several textured ivory candle pillars in varying heights to add warmth and dimension to your space. Be sure to light each one at night to create that special cozy glow.' 6. Place Emphasis On Soft Furnishings (Image credit: David Duchars) Soft furnishings can make or break a home and are considered one of the most critical decorating ideas – for instance, they are essential when it comes to learning how to decorate a den. ‘Home is all about evoking feelings of comfort and coziness, and there are simple ways to create your own cozy retreat. Firstly, invest in versatile products that can be used around the home. Bedfolk's cotton quilt has been designed to wrap your bed up in squishy comfort, but equally, be perfect for cuddling up on the sofa,’ says Jo James, co-founder & creative director of Bedfolk. ‘You can use the same quilt around your home, or add a woven basket with a quilt wrapped up ready to be used – we’ve got quilts in baskets scattered around most rooms in our home, and they are so comforting and so useful – for guests, for babies, for us, even for our dog!’ she divulges. ‘Another key element of creating a cozy, comforting home, is pillows. We’re huge fans of square pillows at Bedfolk – adding a pair to your bed ups the comfort factor hugely and creates a luxurious look relatively affordably. They are perfect for reading in bed or having a morning cup of tea. I also recommend adding square pillows to your sofa – it makes such a difference to have a proper, huge, pillow when snuggling up on the sofa. As well as being ridiculously comfortable, they also create a really cozy look, which is so easy to update by adding a different color pillowcase. ‘I switch out my Bedfolk Snow (off-white) and Rose (barely-pink) linen square pillowcases for Rust (our take on terracotta) and