about contact the latest DESIGN ORGANIZING DIYS REVEALS SEASONAL SHOP DESIGN TIPS How to Create a Cozy Home: 15 Ideas for Any Budget and Style PostedAugust 10, 2023 In the words of Jane Austen, “There is nothing like staying at home for real comfort.” Whether you consider yourself an adventure seeker or a homebody, there is something about having a haven to return to! Today’s post is all about how to create a cozy home, no matter your budget or decor style. Here are my favorite ways to make your home feel inviting, warm, and restful. Table of Contents This post may contain affiliate links. What Makes a Home Feel Cozy? There are many ways to make a home look and feel cozy, and I will share quite a few below. But most importantly, a cozy home is where you feel comfortable and at ease. So as you would imagine, this can mean something a little different to everyone. A cozy home does not need to be a particular decor style. For example, even a minimalist home can feel cozy! If you have a modern home with minimal decor, the key is to balance tidy spaces and clean lines with cozy textures. Other design styles, such as cottage farmhouse or traditional, easily lend themselves to a cozy look. In this case, the key is to create intentional spaces and moments for a serene space. Ready for more cozy home ideas? Here are my top 15 favorite ways to make any home feel warm and cozy. 1. Cozy Bedding Layers Bedding is great place to start when creating a cozy home. For instance, try adding additional layers to your bed with an extra quilt or comforter folder near the end, or a throw blanket draped on one side. Read more: Cozy Bedding Refresh with Serena & Lily 2. Wall Molding for a Cozy Home Secondly, consider adding texture to your walls with wall molding. This picture frame molding is an easy DIY for beginners that does not require a saw. Wall trim helps define large walls and fill empty space for a more cozy vibe. Read more: Primary Bathroom Makeover on a Budget 3. Warm Gold and Brass Metals A simple way to warm up any space is by incorporating warm metals such as gold, brass, and copper. This could be in the form of light fixtures, doorknobs, faucets, or decorative accents. Read more: Entryway Accent Wall and Botanical Decor 4. Cushioned Runner for a Cozy Kitchen Kitchens can feel sterile or boring, so cozy yours up with a cushioned runner rug! I love that this one is soft underfoot and machine washable. Read more: Neutral Spring Kitchen Decor Ideas + Runner 5. Vintage Art Gallery Wall If you don’t have a lot of space or prefer minimal decor, consider hanging vintage art prints. For my office nook, I chose cozy landscapes and sketches. I also hung a few hats on the wall for a lived-in look. Read more: Bedroom Office Nook and Gallery Wall 6. Table Lamps and Cozy Warm Lighting To make your home feel extra cozy, avoid using the ceiling light while relaxing. Include several other light sources throughout your rooms–such as sconces, floor lamps, and table lamps–for soft and subtle lighting. Finally, go for warm white lightbulbs! Even LEDs are pretty good these days. Read more: Best Bedroom Wall Sconces for Any Budget 7. Warm Grey Beige Curtains Curtains and drapes always add coziness because of their layered texture. We have these pinch pleat drapes throughout our main level and they really warm up our white walls! Read more: The Perfect Greige Curtains 8. Soft Rugs for a Cozy Home In addition to adding a cozy layer underfoot, area rugs help define spaces in your home. If you have an open concept living room or awkwardly shaped room, try adding a rug! I especially love Loloi’s super soft CloudPile rugs. Read more: Best Loloi Rugs Review 9. Stacked Books and Mugs This cozy home idea is perfect for book lovers and coffee and tea drinkers! Books add texture to your coffee table or nightstand decor, while also being functional. So, fill your shelves or stack up favorites volumes for a lived-in vibe. As for mugs, try using a mug tree to display your favorites in the kitchen or at a coffee bar. Read more: Fall Mugs and Christmas Mugs 10. Cozy Throw Pillows We’ve already discussed bedding, but there is another important component of cozy bedroom or living room decor. Throw pillows, of course! Check out my post about pillow combinations for tips. Read more: Fall Bedroom Styling Tips 11. Warm Wood Tones for a Cozy Home If you aren’t one for lots of pillows and blankets, try including warm wood tones in your decor. In contrast to painted or whitewashed furniture, these pieces create a cozy feel. Here is our white oak console table! 12. Cozy and Inviting Furniture Can a living room with white furniture feel cozy? I think so! The key is to choose textiles such as linen (or faux linen) with variation and texture for a warmer look. In addition, slipcovered furniture looks cozy and laid back. Above all, choose comfortable furniture for lounging! Read more: Organic Modern Living Room Progress 13. Seagrass Baskets and Rattan Decor Baskets make any space feel both functional and cozy. Lidded baskets are perfect for hiding blankets or toys! You can also introduce woven or rattan textures through decor accents or sconces. Read more: Lidded Baskets Roundup (La Jolla Dupes) 14. Decor Above Kitchen Cabinets Need a way to make a basic kitchen feel special and inviting? Since our cabinets do not go all the way up to the ceiling, I styled them with baskets and my vase collection. Yes, it requires a little dusting. But now our builder grade kitchen feels a little like a cozy cottage! Read more: How to Decorate Above Kitchen Cabinets in 2023 15. Velvet Accents for a Cozy Home Finally, try adding velvet chairs or ottomans for a cozy home vibe. This classic fabric feels and looks so inviting! More Cozy Home Ideas Check out the following for more cozy home inspiration: The Best Cozy Fall Decor Ideas The Best Cozy Christmas Decor Ideas Cozy Girls’ Bedroom with Pink and Neutrals How to Decorate a Cozy Corner (3 Ways) Cozy Bedding Refresh with Serena and Lily I would love to know what makes your home feel cozy, so leave me a comment below! 46 SHARES PREVIOUS 7 Best Faux Olive Trees for Any Budget in 2024 NEXT Metal Haunted Houses for a Modern Spooky Village Similar Posts How to Update a Kitchen Without Renovating My Favorite Home Decor Purchases of 2022 Bedroom Office Combo Ideas for a Small Work Space at Home 30+ Best Textured Table Lamps: Ceramic, Stone, Terracotta Lamps How to Create An Extra Long Media Console or TV Cabinet IKEA BESTA TV Stand Hack: DIY Media Console Unit Leave a Reply Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked * Comment * Name * Email * Website This site uses Akismet to reduce spam. Learn how your comment data is processed. I'm Caitlin. A homebody and interiors lover sharing cozy home inspiration, easy DIYs, organizing ideas, and affordable finds. It's so nice to meet you! CURRENTLY LOVING SEARCH THE BLOG TRENDING POSTS How to Decorate Above Kitchen Cabinets in 2024 10 Comments Painting IKEA Furniture Successfully: How to Paint Laminate 18 Comments The Best Amazon Curtains: Affordable Pinch Pleat Drapes 28 Comments Throw Pillow Combinations: Pretty Pillow Sets for Any Budget 6 Comments COPYRIGHT Thank you for sharing my projects and designs that inspire you. Pinning is always welcome! However, please remember that all content (images and text) is copyrighted. Bloggers may share one image and/or brief quote, and must include a direct link back to the original post. For any other type of image licensing, please contact me at caitlin (at) caitlinmariedesign (dot) com with inquiries. Get The Latest In Your Inbox EXPLORE HOME THE LATEST ABOUT CONTACT PRIVACY POLICY BLOG DESIGN ORGANIZING DIYS REVEALS SEASONAL SHOP SHOP OUR HOME DECOR FINDS GIFT GUIDES LTK SHOP AMAZON STOREFRONT © 2024 CAITLIN MARIE DESIGN Update Privacy Settings