Log In Magazine Newsletters Sweepstakes FOOD HOME LIFE HEALTH STYLE & BEAUTY HOLIDAYS & ENTERTAINING NEWS SHOPPING ABOUT US SUBSCRIBE HOME 8 Easy Ways to Cozy Up Your Home These mini moves will turn your home into a warm and inviting winter retreat. By Ayn-Monique Klahre Updated on June 26, 2022 PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES When it's hot outside, you want your home to be minimalist and breezy, with no extra layers to capture the humidity or hold in heat. But once it gets chilly, you want those layers back, along with space heaters, to make the house feel warm and cozy. Fortunately, it doesn't take much to make your space inviting and comfortable for winter. Mini moves can be as simple as stashing slippers by the front door or turning on the electric fireplace. Switching to soft lighting, such as the glow from a candle placed here and there, can turn your home into a winter-ready retreat. Here are eight tiny ways to cozy up your home. 5 Ways to Make Your Bed Cozier (for Those Who Plan to Hibernate Until Spring) 01 of 08 Update your bedding. Can’t face the chilly temperatures outside? Warm up your home with our coziest decor ideas, then gather around family and friends. Six more weeks of winter just means six more weeks of hygge. 9 Easy Ways to Cozy Up Your Home (Tip #2 is so smart.) 7 Next-Level Candles to Warm Up Your Home How to Build the Warmest, Coziest Winter Bed (We may never leave the house again.). CARLSSON, PETER/GETTY IMAGES Crisp cotton and linen are great for summer, but flannel is where it's at for winter! Trade your crisp sateen sheets for ones that will hold the warmth in, like flannel or jersey. While you're at it, fold a quilt or blanket over the foot of your bed to have handy for the coldest nights. 02 of 08 Swap in snuggly throw pillows. GETTY IMAGES Finally, an excuse to splurge on a big furry pillow! Add one or two textured throw pillows to your couch (or change the covers on your existing pillows) to make your space look and feel cozier. Other options: nubby boucle, a wooly cable knit, or a rich velvet. Don't forget the faux fur blanket, too! 03 of 08 Add warmth underfoot. GETTY IMAGES Sisal and flat-weave rugs are great when it's warm outside, but you want a little pile for winter. If you don't have the budget for a giant area rug, consider layering smaller rugs in strategic spots, like next to the bed or a futon or under the coffee table. Place them in front of a reading chair or upholstered flip top bench—one of our favorite storage furniture pieces. 04 of 08 Consider soft lighting. GETTY IMAGES When the nights get darker earlier, your bed may be tempting you before it's time to repose. Good lighting can help you resist that impulse and stay on your usual sleep schedule. Fit table or desk lamps with warm-toned LED lights for a cozy candle-lit glow that isn't too harsh but will still keep you awake. 05 of 08 Warm up your window treatments. GETTY IMAGES If you have sheer linen curtains, consider trading them out for velvet drapes or any heavy curtain with a thermal lining. Besides making a space look warm and cozy, they'll insulate the room from cold air leaking through old windows. 06 of 08 Rethink your sofa cover. GETTY IMAGES If you have a slip-covered couch—or even if you don't, but your sofa's a standard size—try a new slipcover for the colder months. Choose a deep jewel tone and a softer fabric than your standard crisp white cotton to give the living room a cozier feel. 07 of 08 Layer your kitchen linens. CHRISTOPHER TESTANI Start from the bottom up: a little kitchen rug on the floor in front of the sink, a runner or tablecloth on the breakfast table, and linen slipcovers over your wooden or metal cafe chairs. Anytime you can put a layer of fabric between yourself and bare wood or tile, it'll feel a bit warmer. 08 of 08 Put your memories on display. ANNIE SCHLECHTER They won't technically warm up your space, but a mantel full of holiday cards or a wall full of personal photos will keep your heart full of warm memories as you get through the next few gray months. Was this page helpful? Related Articles We’ve Tested Hundreds of Products, and Amazon’s Big Spring Sale Is the Best Time to Buy These 45 Favorites 5 Design Tips to Steal From Hotels for a Cozier and More Inviting Home Target Just Dropped 1,000+ Home Decor Pieces to Help You Welcome Spring—but These Are the 11 Worth Buying The 14 Best Quilts for Every Bedroom Style The 11 Best Sleeper Sofas, Tested and Reviewed The Best Couch Covers for Keeping Your Sofa Protected The 16 Best Blankets of 2024, Tested and Reviewed The 19 Best Places to Buy Bedding, Tested and Reviewed 15 Colors That Go Perfectly With Blue—And Look Great in Any Room The Best Spring Amazon Decor Finds Include Under-$50 Blankets, Storage Bins, and Light Fixtures Refresh Your Space for Spring Without Breaking the Bank With These New Home Finds at Kohl's 20 Easy Ways to Update Your Bathroom—No Remodeling Required How to Decorate With Throw Pillows According to Experts The 10 Best Kid- and Pet-Friendly Sofas of 2024, Tested and Reviewed Mushroom Motifs Are the Latest Home Design Trend—Here’s Our Fave Fungi-Themed Decor You’ll Want To Get Rid of Your TV After You See Crate & Barrel’s New Line With Leanne Ford NEWSLETTERS Follow Us FOOD HOME LIFE HEALTH STYLE AND BEAUTY HOLIDAYS & ENTERTAINING NEWS SHOPPING About Us Subscribe Editorial Guidelines Product Testing Guidelines Privacy Policy Diversity & Inclusion Pledge Terms of Service Advertise EU Privacy Careers Contact Us Real Simple is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family. Please review our updated Terms of Service.