NEWSLETTERS Open search form DECOR GARDEN HOME IMPROVEMENT CLEANING CELEBRATIONS WHAT TO BUY NEWS ABOUT US HOME DESIGN & DECORATING DECORATING DESIGN TIPS 18 Ways to Cozy Up Your Home for Winter and Beyond By MEGAN MCCARTY Updated on 01/17/24 Design by Leanne Ford Interiors / Photo by Tessa Neustadt If your home has caught a case of the winter blahs, it’s time to embrace your hibernation era. With the addition of a few items—a throw blanket here, ambient lighting there—you can instantly create a warm, comfortable feel in any space. To tap into the cozy vibes from now until springtime, we asked interior designers for their top tips. So go ahead, rev up the Netflix marathon. Using texture, color, and candles (lots of candles), you won’t even mind that it’s freezing outside. Read on for 15 designer-approved ways to make your home extra cozy this winter. 01 of 18 Make Use of a Fireplace Kathy Kuo Home What’s cozier than a fireplace? If you’re lucky enough to have one in your home, use it and use it often. “There's nothing like a crackling fire to cast a cozy glow and fill a room with warmth,” interior designer Kathy Kuo says. Continue to 2 of 18 below 02 of 18 A Rug is a Must David Patterson for Rumor Designs Never underestimate the power of a rug. While you may already be rugged up in your living room and bedroom, consider adding one to a more unexpected space that could use an extra notch of coziness, like a kitchen or dining room. “A vintage rug with rich colors will warm the space up, as well as your feet in the mornings,” Lizzie Beesley, head of design at Magnet, says. “Placing it under a dining table or a sofa is also a great technique to add dimension to the space.’’ Continue to 3 of 18 below 03 of 18 Layer Lots of Pillows Stetten Wilson for The Lynden Lane Co. If you’re going for cozy family room vibes, the first item of business is creating a space where they can sit down, get comfortable, and stay awhile, according to Barbi Walters, principal designer at The Lynden Lane Co. That’s why she loves layering pillows. “You can take big, chunky ones that match the color of your sofa and toss them on the floor for some additional seats with a front-row fireplace view,” she says. Think of the smaller, uniquely shaped pillows as an opportunity to express your personal style, highlighting colors, patterns, and textures that feel uniquely you. Continue to 4 of 18 below 04 of 18 Switch Out Your Bedding Design Willow Street Interiors + Design / Photo: Rachel Alyse Photography The light linen sheets you sleep with on summer’s sultriest days won’t cut it for your hibernation season. Instead, switch out your quilt or duvet with a heavier option, then add throw blankets, toe warmers, and (lots of) pillows. “Adding a textured fur or faux fur blanket at the end of the bed adds another layer of cozy and warmth,” Lindsey Jamison of Rumor Designs says. You’ll get bonus cozy points if you keep a pair of shearling slippers next to your bed too. Continue to 5 of 18 below 05 of 18 Light a Candle (or 10) Afro Bohemian Living Coziness 101: light a candle. Or, better yet, light lots of candles (as long as you can keep an eye on them all—safety first). “Candles are a great table centerpiece, but can also be used throughout the home to create an instant atmosphere, whether that’s on a shelf in a hallway or on the fireplace in the living room,” Paula Boston, visual merchandiser for Festive Lights, shares with The Spruce. Continue to 6 of 18 below 06 of 18 Fill Your Home With Conversation-Starters Avery Cox Design A room decorated with conversation-starting elements is bound to bring people together—the ultimate way to a cozy vibe. Think: the seashells you brought back from Portugal, the framed poem your kindergartener wrote, the records you’ve collected from vintage shops over the years. “Style your coffee table with plenty of engaging art books that are actually meant to be cracked open and paged through,” Kuo says, “And opt for a super-plush rug underfoot that fills the room with a warm, fuzzy feeling from the ground up." Continue to 7 of 18 below 07 of 18 Ambient Lighting is a Must Rennie Solis for Sarah Solis Design Studio Table lamps and floor lamps are small in size but mighty in terms of the cozy vibe they bring. Ambient lighting is much softer than full-blast overhead lights and allows you to create different moods. So go ahead, put your little lamps to work. Continue to 8 of 18 below 08 of 18 Layer Linens on Your Bed Pom Pom at Home For Pom Pom at Home CEO and founder Hilde Leiaghat, the key to creating a bed you don’t want to crawl out of is layers, layers, and more layers—but not all with the same fabric. “The secret is using different textures,” Leighat says. “Your sheets being the finest of the texture, and then you go to more and more texture as you add on layers, with heavy linen weaves, hand-loomed, heavy-knit throws, and different fibers to make your bed look and feel interesting.” Consider pillows and throw blankets the cherries on top of your sweet treat of a bed. Continue to 9 of 18 below 09 of 18 Incorporate a Scent Lauren Taylor for Carrie Livingston Whether you have a signature scent or switch up your fragrance depending on the season, your home deserves to get in on the good-smelling fun, too. “Add a nice fragrance to a bedroom through a candle or diffuser that feels outdoorsy, woods, or earthy,” Jamison says. “This is a nice subtle way to add a cozy feeling.” Continue to 10 of 18 below 10 of 18 Hang Velvet Drapery Dustin Halleck for JAM Interior Design Few decor items are as luxe as velvet drapes. They beg to be touched, and instantly provide a cozy feeling. Choose drapes in a deep gem-like hue to add drama to a living room, dining room, or bedroom design. Best yet, velvet drapes will keep you warm and cozy—literally!—by protecting you from cool drafty windows. Continue to 11 of 18 below 11 of 18 Incorporate Natural Materials into Your Kitchen Lobster and Swan Kitchens aren’t known for their inherent coziness, but there are ways to counter that coolness while adding layers and depths to the space. Incorporating warm, naturalistic materials like wood, leather, and textiles in your kitchen will balance out the colder materials traditionally found in the space, according to Beesley. “From wooden chairs and tables to smaller accent details such as wooden coasters and fabric tea towels, weaving in these natural materials will add textural interest to the space.," she says. Continue to 12 of 18 below 12 of 18 Install Dimmers on Your Light Switches Design: Sarah Solis Design Studio / Photo: Shade Degges Nothing kills a cozy vibe faster than harsh overhead lighting. There’s an easy solution though. “If you are looking to create a space that can transition into a cozy evening spot, it’s a great idea to invest in dimmable lighting,” Beesley says. “This will allow you to alter the atmosphere in an instant.” Continue to 13 of 18 below 13 of 18 Mix and Match Personal Touches and Plants deVOL Kitchens ‘’Creating a truly cozy kitchen comes down to the smaller details that tie together cohesively to create a space that is unique and inviting,” Beesley says. If you have open shelves, use those to display dishes and mugs in different patterns—they’ll bring personality and warmth to the space. “Dried flowers and fresh plants will also add charm to a kitchen,” Beesley says. “Not only are they decorative, but they are proven to reduce stress and will help make you feel calm and relaxed.’’ Continue to 14 of 18 below 14 of 18 Outfit Your Entryway With a Bench Becca Interiors Between scarves, boots, mittens, and the puffiest of puffy jackets, entryways can become a pile of outerwear in the winter. “Add a beautiful bench by the front door for guests to remove cumbersome outdoor gear,” Julie Brayton of Brayton Interiors says. That way, both you and your guests will feel cozy within the first few steps of walking into your home. Continue to 15 of 18 below 15 of 18 Hang Fairy Lights Amazon Missing the soft glow of your Christmas tree? Once the ornaments have been packed away until next December, use fairy lights to add a cozy feel to your home. “Fairy lights open up a new world of sparkle and warmth for your home, whether you want to drape them around artwork or mirrors on your wall, or cascade them from the ceiling,” Boston says. Continue to 16 of 18 below 16 of 18 Embrace "Grandpa Chic" Markus Wilborn Step aside, coastal grandmother—"grandpa chic" is the cozy design style that will perfectly complement your home for the winter months. To achieve the link, warm things up with flannels, deep wood tones, quirky decorative accents, and moody colors like black and navy. Continue to 17 of 18 below 17 of 18 Decorate Cozy Spaces, Like Basements Michelle Berwick Design The winter is the perfect time to look inward and take care of interior projects you've always wanted to complete, like finishing a basement, for example. Give some attention to cozy attic spaces, reading nooks, or spare rooms, and look for opportunities to make use of them. Continue to 18 of 18 below 18 of 18 Add Heavier Accents The Spruce / Christopher Lee Foto Now is the perfect time to bust out your heaviest throw blankets and flannel sheets. These can head back into storage when the weather warms, but nothing cozies up a home like elements that will actually keep you cozy. 44 Cozy Living Room Ideas You'll Love More from The Spruce 9 Designer-Approved Ways to Redecorate Your Entire Home Without Breaking the Bank 7 Bedroom Decorating Mistakes Designers Immediately Notice I Turned My Bedroom Into a "Quiet Luxury" Oasis for Spring—These Are My Best Tips It’s Time to Upgrade Your Home for Cozy Season—Here’s How to Do It 45 Cozy Bedroom Ideas That Feel Like a Warm Hug 7 Ways to Make Your Home Cozier This Winter Without Spending a Dime Designing a Home Sanctuary: How to Craft an Intentional Space You Truly Love 40 Modern Fall Decorating Ideas to Freshen Up Your Space 65 Fall Decor Ideas for an Autumn-Inspired Home 92 Home Decor Ideas That Will Suit Any and Every Room in the House 48 Small Sunroom Ideas for a Warm and Happy Space 64 Wallpaper Ideas to Revitalize Every Room in the House 28 Fall Living Room Decor Ideas to Cozy Up Your Space 33 Aesthetic Room Ideas for a Trendy Space 44 Cozy Living Room Ideas You'll Love 44 Cozy Reading Nook Ideas You'll Want to Curl Up in With a Good Book Get daily tips and tricks for making your best home. SUBSCRIBE Follow us: DECOR GARDEN HOME IMPROVEMENT CLEANING CELEBRATIONS WHAT TO BUY NEWS About Us Terms Of Service Editorial Guidelines Advertise Careers Privacy Policy Contact EU Privacy The Spruce is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family. Please review our updated Terms of Service.