Skip to main content Skip to navigation Skip to navigation Print subscriptions Sign in Search jobs Search Europe edition Support the Guardian Fund independent journalism with €10 per month Support us News Opinion Sport Culture Lifestyle More Football Cricket Rugby union Tennis Cycling F1 Golf US sports Red Bull’s Max Verstappen returns to the pits after retiring on the fourth lap of the Australian F1 Grand Prix 2024 Photograph: Scott Barbour/Reuters Sportblog Formula One Red Bull’s aura of invincibility goes up in flames to ignite F1 championship race Max Verstappen’s early retirement in the Australian GP gave hope to the rest of the field as Carlos Sainz led Ferrari to victory Jack Snape at Albert Park Sun 24 Mar 2024 08.59 CET Last modified on Mon 25 Mar 2024 03.30 CET Share T he smouldering tyre sat stacked on top of another behind the Red Bull garage, the stench wafting up past the flutes and canapés of Albert Park’s corporate hospitality above. Its demise disappointing for fans of Max Verstappen, but a source of optimism for the rest of the Formula One field. It was on lap three of race three of the 2024 season that Red Bull’s aura of invincibility burst. Verstappen had won nine straight races and when he streaked off from pole looked likely to make it 10. That would also have been three from three in 2024. Carlos Sainz wins Australian F1 Grand Prix in one-two finish for Ferrari Read more But within minutes he had complained on the radio he had “lost the car” as smoke billowed from his rear right. Moments later he was in the pits, a fire extinguisher dulling the flames. On the track, his teammate Sergio Pérez was struggling against the Ferraris and McLarens. Off it, the press descended upon Verstappen in the paddock. The pit crew wheeled out his unused tyres from his garage, one stack almost toppling into a cameraman when the trolley dug into the grass. All weekend, the cloud of controversy was never far from the beleaguered team principal, Christian Horner. The signs had been ominous. “It’s such a long way to come,” Horner had said loudly to a group of hangers‑on in the paddock before the race. But it was worth the trip for the resurgent Ferrari, after Carlos Sainz and Charles Leclerc made it a one-two for the prancing horse, with Leclerc also recording the race’s fastest lap. The red car had looked competitive all weekend, and on Sunday comfortably held off the chasing McLarens and the Red Bull of Pérez. The race had finished under yellow following a late accident involving George Russell. That meant Mercedes finished without a point, after Lewis Hamilton was forced to retire early in the race. Hamilton had struggled all weekend and missed Q1, starting outside the top 10 in his final appearance for Mercedes in Melbourne before he leaves for Ferrari next season. He looked most comfortable on the back of a steward’s motorcycle after his DNF. In the Albert Park infield it toot‑tooted the VIPs away, before the English driver slid on to his scooter for the trip down the paddock. The day belonged to another in the driver merry-go-round. Sainz celebrated the chequered flag after nursing his tyres in the later laps. The Spaniard had his appendix removed two weeks ago, missing the race in Saudi Arabia. He is due to leave Ferrari at the end of the season to make way for the arriving Hamilton. “Life is a rollercoaster”, Sainz said down the radio on his victory lap. Carlos Sainz of Ferrari celebrates on the podium after winning the Australian F1 Grand Prix ahead of teammate Charles Leclerc in Melbourne. Photograph: Mark Peterson/Reuters Back in the pit lane, the red overalls were jubilant, but the celebrations this year were somewhat different. Fines of A$17,000 (£13,480) were threatened for any fans who set foot on the track, after the dangerous invasion last year while cars were still lapping. The crowds that had once filled main straight are no more, and now the podium presentation can only be viewed from the grandstands opposite. The change was a blow to tradition, but Melbourne’s Formula One glitz has been retained. The Hollywood actors Zac Efron and Eric Bana, as well as Guenther Steiner, an icon of the Netflix series Drive to Survive, were prominent in the paddock, making the most of the sunshine that appeared for the first time this weekend in the hours before the start of the race. Yet the major attractions were the drivers. The local favourites Daniel Ricciardo and Oscar Piastri strolled to the garage not long before the race. “Get ’em Danny,” one local fan shouted, as Ricciardo was asked to sign another’s orange McLaren polo branded with “PIASTRI” on the shoulders. Sign up to Australia Sport Free newsletter Get a daily roundup of the latest sports news, features and comment from our Australian sports desk Enter your email address Sign up Privacy Notice: Newsletters may contain info about charities, online ads, and content funded by outside parties. For more information see our Privacy Policy. We use Google reCaptcha to protect our website and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply. Amid the grid civilities after the national anthem, it was the hand of the younger Australian that several dignitaries reached for first, leaving Ricciardo – who started at the back of the field – on the outer. The new pecking order was made obvious as Piastri cruised to the finish in fourth. His senior teammate Lando Norris bested him but was himself a beneficiary of McLaren’s hierarchy. Midway through the race, Piastri had track position in front of his teammate before the order came on the team radio to swap positions. Australian F1 Grand Prix 2024 – in pictures Read more Ricciardo had a more difficult day. After his best lap was taken off him in qualifying, he started from the back. The 34‑year‑old clawed his way to 12th after starting on soft tyres. His teammate Yuki Tsunoda once again finished up the track, in seventh, after a penalty pushed Fernando Alonso down the order for causing George Russell’s late off. But this was finally a day that Formula One didn’t need to look to the midfield for its drama. Amid the swaying gum trees in the sun of Albert Park, largely thanks to Red Bull’s inferno – later diagnosed as a faulty brake – the championship has new life. Explore more on these topics Formula One Sportblog Red Bull Max Verstappen Ferrari Motor sport Australia sport features Share Reuse this content Most viewed LiveIsrael-Gaza live: UN security council passes resolution calling for immediate ceasefire, as US abstains Putin’s lethally negligent failure can’t be covered up. The Moscow attack leaves him weaker than ever Simon Tisdall LiveAppeals court reduces Trump bond to $175m and extends deadline 10 days – live Northern lights predicted in US and UK on Monday night in wake of solar storms LiveRussian PM says those behind concert hall attack ‘don’t deserve mercy’ as Macron warns it would be ‘cynical’ to blame Ukraine – live Sportblog Women’s Super League: talking points from the weekend’s action 4h ago 8 Three years on, Football Index users are still trying to get their money back 8h ago Showman Ivan Toney must seize his chance at crucial England audition 17h ago AFL score review system is ‘bush league’ in competition groaning with money 1d ago 155 Christian Horner opens door for Red Bull reunion with ‘nemesis’ Carlos Sainz 1d ago Endrick lights up Wembley in latest instalment of career on fast forward 2d ago Conor Gallagher scurries his way into England’s Euro 2024 midfield plans 2d ago Premier League title race hinges on Etihad collision and the force is with Arsenal 2d ago 34 More from Sport Should Alonso pick Liverpool, Bayern or Barcelona? 1h ago 70 'Worst start to season' Hamilton retires from Australian GP 22h ago This USMNT team should be entering its prime. Now they need to prove it 2h ago 2 Jessie Diggins Eating disorders are about control when you feel like you have none 7h ago ‘Good experience’ Bellingham backed to learn after being targeted by Brazil 17h ago Tennis Injured Murray falls to agonising defeat against Machac in Miami Open 16h ago 127 Football Weekly Brazil give England food for thought and Wales one step away 2h ago 5 Cycling Pogacar wins final stage to round off Volta a Catalunya triumph 1d ago 45 ‘Lies were told’ Cancelo blasts Man City over his departure 17h ago Hungary Four killed at rally after race car crashes into spectators 23h ago Most viewed Across The Guardian In Sport Russia refuses to blame IS for concert hall attack despite growing evidence Live Israel-Gaza live: UN security council passes resolution calling for immediate ceasefire, as US abstains Live Russian PM says those behind concert hall attack ‘don’t deserve mercy’ as Macron warns it would be ‘cynical’ to blame Ukraine – live Sacha Baron Cohen denies Rebel Wilson’s claims of ‘asshole’ behaviour on set At four, I was kidnapped and sex-trafficked for years. Now I fight for the powerless – and win every case ‘The time is here’: the ex-government insider shaking up Hungarian politics Moscow attack explainer: why would Islamic State attack Russia and what will Putin’s response be? At least four judges resign from men-only Garrick Club after backlash Northern lights predicted in US and UK on Monday night in wake of solar storms Putin’s lethally negligent failure can’t be covered up. The Moscow attack leaves him weaker than ever Football Cricket Rugby union Tennis Cycling F1 Golf US sports News Opinion Sport Culture Lifestyle Original reporting and incisive analysis, direct from the Guardian every morning Sign up for our email Help Complaints & corrections SecureDrop Work for us Privacy policy Cookie policy Terms & conditions Contact us All topics All writers Digital newspaper archive Facebook YouTube Instagram LinkedIn Twitter Newsletters Advertise with us Search UK jobs Support the Guardian Available for everyone, funded by readers Support us Back to top © 2024 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved. (dcr)