ABC News
VIDEO
LIVE
SHOWS
ELECTION 2024
538
Stream on
Louisiana inmate escapes custody after pepper spraying deputy, stealing officer's car: Sheriff
The inmate should be considered "armed and dangerous," authorities said.
ByDarren Reynolds, Jolie Lash, and Megan Wordell
February 26, 2024, 5:06 AM
1:11
National headlines from ABC News
Catch up on the developing stories making headlines.
A convicted felon who had been in custody on a second-degree murder charge escaped on Sunday after pepper spraying his transporting deputy and stealing her car, authorities said.
The inmate, Leon Ruffin, should be considered "armed and dangerous," Sheriff Joseph Lopinto of the Jefferson Parish Sheriff's Office in Louisiana, told the media Sunday night at a press briefing.
Lopinto said he doesn't believe the man "has anything to lose" as he could be facing life in prison if convicted on the second-degree murder charge.
Ruffin had been transferred from the medical facility in the corrections center to a local hospital around noon on Sunday on the advice of the medical team after suffering from a possible seizure. After being treated at the hospital, Ruffin created some type of disturbance as he was being driven out of the hospital parking lot, Lopinto said. The female deputy got out of the car and he pepper sprayed her, the official said. The suspect then took the deputy's vehicle, he added.
Inmate Leon Ruffin in a mugshot from the Jefferson Parish Sheriff's Office
Inmate Leon Ruffin in a mugshot from the Jefferson Parish Sheriff's Office
MORE: Kentucky college student found dead in dorm room, wrestling teammate arrested: Police
The deputy fired shots at the car but does not know if Ruffin was hit.
At present, authorities do not know where the suspect got the pepper spray. The deputy still had her pepper spray, taser and weapon following his escape.
Authorities have contacted the family of the victim in Ruffin's alleged second-degree murder case.
Prior to his trip to the hospital, Ruffin had been in the medical unit at the corrections facility, but Lopinto said they believed he was faking his injuries.
Related Topics
Escaped Inmates
Promoted Links by Taboola
Innovación para todas tus vidas
Nissan Qashqai Híbrido
Ver oferta
Nuevo Astra Tech Edition
Opel
Leer más
Diseñado para ser elegante y práctico
Honda
Más información
Brothers resentenced to 60 years to life in 1995 slayings of parents, younger brother
Ohio mom who left toddler alone when she went on vacation pleads guilty to aggravated murder
American couple missing in Caribbean after fugitives allegedly steal their yacht: Police
Empieza a ahorrar con Formidable Energía. Endesa.
Endesa
Recupera tu dinero
OCU
Haz clic aquí
Es pecado no conducir el nuevo Abarth 500 eléctrico
Abarth
Más información
Top Stories
Ronna McDaniel to resign as RNC chair days after Super Tuesday
2 hours ago
Consumers are increasingly pushing back against price increases — and winning
Feb 24, 11:57 PM
Ethics panel refers Trump PAC for felony prosecution
Feb 23, 9:24 PM
Kentucky college student found dead in dorm room, wrestling teammate arrested
Feb 25, 11:43 PM
Ricki Lake shares weight loss results after fall pledge to 'get healthier'
Feb 25, 10:40 PM
ABC News Live
24/7 coverage of breaking news and live events
ABC News Network
About Nielsen Measurement
Children's Online Privacy Policy
Contact Us
Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information
Interest-Based Ads
Privacy Policy
Terms of Use
Your US State Privacy Rights
© 2024 ABC News