Enable accessibility EVEN WHEN THE NEWS IS FREE, JOURNALISM IS NOT. SUPPORT INDEPENDENT, FACT-BASED JOURNALISM. DONATE WORLD U.S. ELECTION 2024 POLITICS SPORTS ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS SCIENCE FACT CHECK ODDITIES NEWSLETTERS VIDEO HEALTH PHOTOGRAPHY ... Show Search Israel-Hamas war Trump fraud payment deadline Linda Bean dies Boeing shake-up Shohei Ohtani SPORTS Browns are re-signing kicker Cade York, AP source says. The former draft pick was cut last season FILE - Cleveland Browns place kicker Cade York (3) kicks a field goal during an NFL preseason football game against the Kansas City Chiefs Saturday, Aug. 26, 2023, in Kansas City, Mo. Cleveland is re-signing York, a fourth-round draft pick in 2022 whose struggles led to him being cut before last season, a person familiar with the team’s decision told The Associated Press on Saturday, March 23, 2024. (AP Photo/Ed Zurga, File) BY TOM WITHERS Updated 6:39 PM UTC, March 23, 2024 Share The Browns are giving unpredictable, unreliable kicker Cade York another chance. Cleveland is re-signing York, a fourth-round draft pick in 2022 whose struggles led to him being cut before last season, a person familiar with the decision told The Associated Press on Saturday. York’s return on a futures contract was first reported by Cleveland.com. He’ll be with the team during the offseason — the Browns usually carry extra kickers in training camp — and could end up competing with Dustin Hopkins, according to the person who spoke to The Associated on condition of anonymity because York has not signed his deal. York, who began his NFL career with a 58-yard field goal in the final seconds to win the opener at Carolina in 2022, was released last summer following a dreadful preseason. His departure was followed by the Browns trading for Hopkins, who was sensational for Cleveland and a big part of its playoff run. Hopkins went 33 of 36 on field-goal tries and made all eight attempts beyond 50 yards. He was out for the playoffs after injuring his hamstring while trying to catch a kickoff returner in a Dec. 24 game at Houston. READ MORE Titans finalizing deal with Chiefs to acquire cornerback L’Jarius Sneed, AP source says Buffalo Bills shore up interior offensive line depth by signing Will Clapp to 1-year contract Welsh rugby star Louis Rees-Zammit was the center of attention at NFL’s international player pro day York was the highest kicker drafted in six years when the Browns selected him out of LSU two years ago. He made 24 of 32 field goals as a rookie and was 35 of 37 on extra points. But things began to go astray for him last summer when he missed four kicks in exhibition games, and the Browns, who had high expectations of making a Super Bowl run, decided to let York go. After Cleveland released him, York was signed to Tennessee’s practice squad. He also spent time with the New York Giants but didn’t kick in a regular-season game. ___ AP NFL: https://apnews.com/hub/nfl by Taboola Suggested For You ' ' ' ' ' ' After whistle hastens Samford’s exit from March Madness, the referee could be next The referee who blew the whistle that worked against Samford at the end of its loss to Kansas in the NCAA Tournament might be following the Bulldogs straight out of town. AP News Fulton County DA Fani Willis says despite efforts to slow down Trump case, ‘the train is coming’ Fulton County District Attorney Fani Willis says the election interference prosecution against Donald Trump moves forward, saying “the train is coming.” AP News Un avance hacia el futuro Advertisement: KIA Haz clic aquí No espere: los audífonos que necesita hoy en Girona! Advertisement: QuieroEscuchar Prueba ahora Trabaja con el Transporter a un precio especial Advertisement: Volkswagen Haz clic aquí Enamora en cualquier terreno con Kia Stonic Advertisement: KIA Ver oferta El Caddy por 250 €/mes* con My Renting Advertisement: Volkswagen Más información Hasta un 35% en tu escapada de Semana Santa. Advertisement: Meliá Hotels Reservar Ahora 2x1: cita online y cambia tus neumáticos. Oferta 2x1 en neumáticos de Opel Service. Pide tu cita online y consíguelo ya. Advertisement: Opel Obtén información Nuevo Alfa Romeo Tonale Tributo Italiano Solo este mes condiciones especiales en Alfa Romeo Tonale Tributo Italiano Advertisement: Alfa Romeo Ver oferta Indestructible Military Smartwatch Finally on Sale In Spain. How Tough? Advertisement: Best Gadget Discounts Read More Cómo conseguir placas solares casi gratis en estas provincias Advertisement: Ayudas solares 2024 Del 1 al 31 de Marzo Advertisement: DS Leer más Freshman Audi Crooks scores 40 as No. 7-seed Iowa State beats 10th-seed Maryland in NCAA first round Freshman Audi Crooks scored a career-high 40 points on 18-for-20 shooting and grabbed 12 rebounds in her sensational NCAA Tournament debut, and No. 7-seed Iowa State hit all the big shots in the second half to rally from 20 points down and beat 10th-seeded Maryland 93-86 in the first round. AP News Trial starts for Arizona border rancher charged with killing migrant on his property An Arizona rancher has gone on trial in the fatal shooting of a migrant on his property near Mexico. The trial of 75-year-old George Alan Kelly started Friday. AP News Sumérgete en el lujo italiano: Stelvio. Advertisement: Alfa Romeo Haz clic aquí La mejor alarma arrasa en España, no vas a creer este precio Advertisement: Securitas Alarma Más información Haga esto en vez de comprar caros paneles solares ¡Es genial! Advertisement: EcoRenovable Police find Missouri student Riley Strain’s body in Tennessee river; no foul play suspected No foul play is suspected, investigators said. AP News 2 crew members die during ‘incident’ on Holland America cruise ship Two crew members on a Holland America cruise ship died during an “incident” in the ship's engineering space. AP News ¿Cuáles son las profesiones con más futuro? Advertisement: Repsol Más información Girona: Se buscan: 500 personas mayores de 50 años Advertisement: Experto en Audicion El precio de la alarma en España, con instalación incluida, te va a sorprender Advertisement: Securitas Alarma Haz clic aquí British man who poisoned couple with fentanyl and monitored their death via app sentenced to life A British IT worker who poisoned a married couple with the strong opioid fentanyl has been sentenced to a minimum of 37 years in prison for murder. AP News 4 men charged in Moscow attack, showing signs of beatings at hearing as court says 2 accept guilt Four men accused of staging the Russia concert hall attack that killed more than 130 people have appeared before a Moscow court showing signs of severe beatings as they faced formal terrorism charges. AP News Gasolina, eléctrico ¡y ahora con versión híbrida! Descúbrelo en nuestra web. Advertisement: Opel Ver oferta Un avance hacia el futuro Advertisement: KIA Haz clic aquí No espere: los audífonos que necesita hoy en Girona! Advertisement: QuieroEscuchar Prueba ahora Pennsylvania teen accused of killing 12-year-old girl, sentenced to 15 to 40 years A Pennsylvania teen charged in a 12-year-old girl’s death after another teen reported receiving a video asking for help cleaning up and getting rid of the body has been sentenced to 15 to 40 years in prison as part of a plea deal. AP News Diamondbacks pitcher Eduardo Rodríguez has lat strain Eduardo Rodríguez will have to wait to make his Arizona Diamondbacks debut. Diamondbacks manager Torey Lovullo told reporters that Rodríguez has a lat strain, which means the left-hander will open the season on the injured list. AP News Enamora en cualquier terreno con Kia Stonic Advertisement: KIA Ver oferta Trabaja con el Transporter a un precio especial Advertisement: Volkswagen Haz clic aquí Hasta un 35% en tu escapada de Semana Santa. Advertisement: Meliá Hotels Reservar Ahora British man who poisoned couple with fentanyl and monitored their death via app sentenced to life A British IT worker who poisoned a married couple with the strong opioid fentanyl has been sentenced to a minimum of 37 years in prison for murder. AP News 4 men charged in Moscow attack, showing signs of beatings at hearing as court says 2 accept guilt Four men accused of staging the Russia concert hall attack that killed more than 130 people have appeared before a Moscow court showing signs of severe beatings as they faced formal terrorism charges. AP News Gasolina, eléctrico ¡y ahora con versión híbrida! Descúbrelo en nuestra web. Advertisement: Opel Ver oferta Un avance hacia el futuro Advertisement: KIA Haz clic aquí No espere: los audífonos que necesita hoy en Girona! Advertisement: QuieroEscuchar Prueba ahora Pennsylvania teen accused of killing 12-year-old girl, sentenced to 15 to 40 years A Pennsylvania teen charged in a 12-year-old girl’s death after another teen reported receiving a video asking for help cleaning up and getting rid of the body has been sentenced to 15 to 40 years in prison as part of a plea deal. AP News Diamondbacks pitcher Eduardo Rodríguez has lat strain Eduardo Rodríguez will have to wait to make his Arizona Diamondbacks debut. Diamondbacks manager Torey Lovullo told reporters that Rodríguez has a lat strain, which means the left-hander will open the season on the injured list. AP News Enamora en cualquier terreno con Kia Stonic Advertisement: KIA Ver oferta Trabaja con el Transporter a un precio especial Advertisement: Volkswagen Haz clic aquí Hasta un 35% en tu escapada de Semana Santa. Advertisement: Meliá Hotels Reservar Ahora by Taboola Suggested For You ¿Granos y manchas de acné? Eucerin:Advertisement Es pecado no conducir el nuevo Abarth 500 eléctrico Abarth:Advertisement Más información ¿Qué es el ecodiseño? Repsol:Advertisement Más información El truco para mejorar la audición que está causando furor en España Experto en Audicion:Advertisement The Associated Press is an independent global news organization dedicated to factual reporting. Founded in 1846, AP today remains the most trusted source of fast, accurate, unbiased news in all formats and the essential provider of the technology and services vital to the news business. More than half the world’s population sees AP journalism every day. THE ASSOCIATED PRESS AP.ORG CAREERS ADVERTISE WITH US CONTACT US ACCESSIBILITY STATEMENT TERMS OF USE PRIVACY POLICY MORE FROM AP NEWS ABOUT AP NEWS VALUES AND PRINCIPLES AP’S ROLE IN ELECTIONS AP LEADS AP DEFINITIVE SOURCE BLOG AP IMAGES SPOTLIGHT BLOG AP STYLEBOOK Copyright 2024 The Associated Press. All Rights Reserved. twitter instagram facebook script> // Construct the payload var payload = ; // Send the payload gtag(gtm.js, page_type, payload);