World
Africa
Americas
Asia
Australia
China
Europe
India
Middle East
United Kingdom
Watch
Audio
Live TV
Log In
World / Europe
Zelensky says Trump doesn’t understand Putin because he has never fought him
By Ivana Kottasová and Kaitlan Collins, CNN
4 minute read
Updated 6:12 AM EST, Mon February 26, 2024
Video Ad Feedback
Zelensky fires back at Republican's claim about sending aid to Ukraine
00:56 - Source: CNN
Kyiv, Ukraine
CNN
 — 
Former US President Donald Trump will be “against Americans” if he chooses to support Russia over Ukraine, the war-torn country’s President Volodymyr Zelensky said Sunday.
Speaking to CNN’s Kaitlan Collins in Kyiv, Zelensky said he “can’t understand how Donald Trump can be on the side of (Russian President Vladimir) Putin.”
“It’s unbelievable,” he added.
Trump, who is on the verge of becoming the Republican presidential nominee after winning the South Carolina Republican primary, has in the past refused to say whether he wants Russia or Ukraine to win the war.
Zelensky said that he believed Trump — who also claimed he would end the conflict in one day if elected — did not understand Putin’s goals.
“I think Donald Trump doesn’t know Putin,” Zelensky said. “I know he met him… but he never fought with Putin. (The) American army never fought with the army of Russia. Never… I have a better understanding,” he said.
“I don’t think he understands that Putin will never stop,” he said.
RELATED ARTICLE
Zelensky warns ‘millions will be killed’ without US aid to Kyiv, as Ukrainian troop deaths reach at least 31,000
Zelensky told CNN that Russia is spending “billions” on spreading false information about the war, and that it has been successful in using disinformation as a weapon – and in influencing the debate in the US.
“I was surprised that they are strong even in the United States, in the EU (European Union), all over the world. They put a lot of money (in)to this,” he said.
Inflating the number of Ukrainian casualties is just one example of how Russia is spreading false narratives, the president said. Earlier on Sunday, Zelensky disclosed for the first time the number of Ukrainian soldiers killed in the conflict so far: 31,000.
He said it was important to share the number because “we’ve had enough of the lies,” adding that even some US politicians have been sharing widely inaccurate numbers.
CNN cannot independently verify the numbers, which came on the weekend Ukraine marked two years since Russia’s full-scale invasion. US officials estimate some 70,000 soldiers have been killed and nearly twice that number wounded.
‘Millions will die’
Ukraine has had a difficult start to the year. It suffered a major defeat earlier this month when Ukrainian troops withdrew from Avdiivka, an eastern city they held for a decade.
Zelensky and other Ukrainian and Western officials said Avdiivka was lost because troops did not have enough ammunition to defend it.
Yet despite the horrific consequences of these shortages, the US Congress continues to stall on President Joe Biden’s $60 billion military aid package for Ukraine.
Zelensky said that without US aid, Ukraine will not only struggle to make any new gains on the battlefield, but it will also find it difficult to keep defending itself this year.
“People will be prepared, but ammunition will not be prepared and brigades will not be ready… not only for our counter-offensive, they will not be ready to defend, to stay strong. It will be very difficult,” he said.
The timing is crucial as Zelensky said earlier on Sunday that Russia could attempt a new offensive as early as late May.
RELATED ARTICLE
As US Congress stalls on aid, Ukrainian soldiers head to the frontlines knowing they don’t have enough ammunition
Ukraine’s new army chief Oleksandr Syrskyi is currently drawing up two versions of a plan on what to do next, he said. If Kyiv gets the US assistance, it will be able to start pushing back against Russia. If it doesn’t, it will have to focus on defending only.
Zelensky said that he has spoken to the House Speaker Mike Johnson about the aid package and was feeling optimistic after that conversation.
“He said that he will do everything to support Ukraine, and he’s on our side, and he understands how heroic our people, our soldiers and civilians (are),” he said.
Zelensky added that while he understands the US is heading into elections, he is hoping an agreement can be reached.
“If they will change their minds, it’s a big problem for us,” he said.
“I asked President (Biden)… ‘please, president, I’m asking you to help me and to help the Ukrainian people… please have one meeting with each other, Democrats and Republicans, and please, can you have a deal?’” he said.
Asked by Collins about a claim made by US Senator JD Vance that the outcome of the war will not change even if Ukraine receives the money, Zelensky said Vance “does not understand what is going on here.”
“To understand it is to come to the frontline to see what’s going on… without this support. And he will understand that millions of people will be killed,” he added.
“He doesn’t understand it, of course, God bless you don’t have the war on your territory.”
CNN’s Andy Carey, Madalena Araujo and Victoria Butenko contributed reporting.
Up next
‘Very dangerous’: Zelensky on Trump’s claim he could end Russia-Ukraine war within 24 hours
3 minute read
Why Zelensky’s plea will fall on many deaf Republican ears
9 minute read
Two years into war, Putin gets a propaganda opportunity as Congress dithers over Ukraine
5 minute read
Zelensky warns ‘millions will be killed’ without US aid to Kyiv, as Ukrainian troop deaths reach at least 31,000
3 minute read
The war in Ukraine in 12 key moments
8 minute read
Most read
One of the world’s biggest cities may be just months away from running out of water
Kenneth Mitchell, ‘Star Trek’ and ‘Marvel’ actor, dead at 49
Takeaways from South Carolina’s Republican primary
Why isn’t the Supreme Court moving faster on Trump’s immunity challenge?
Family describes violent scene left behind on missing American couple’s yacht after alleged hijacking in Grenada
AT&T to reimburse customers after massive network outage
I’m not a gambling addict, but I’ve been to Vegas 44 times. Here’s why
US airman sets himself on fire outside Israeli Embassy in Washington
No, electric vehicle sales aren’t dropping. Here’s what’s really going on
Invasive Jorō spider is surprisingly tolerant of busy urban settings, according to new study
MORE FROM CNN
‘Very dangerous’: Zelensky on Trump’s claim he could end Russia-Ukraine war ...
Why Zelensky’s plea will fall on many deaf Republican ears
Two years into war, Putin gets a propaganda opportunity as Congress dithers ...
NEWS & BUZZ
One of the world’s biggest cities may be just months away from running out of water
Kenneth Mitchell, ‘Star Trek’ and ‘Marvel’ actor, dead at 49
Takeaways from South Carolina’s Republican primary
Search
World
Africa
Americas
Asia
Australia
China
Europe
India
Middle East
United Kingdom
US Politics
SCOTUS
Congress
Facts First
2024 Elections
Business
Markets
Tech
Media
Calculators
Videos
Health
Life, But Better
Fitness
Food
Sleep
Mindfulness
Relationships
Entertainment
Movies
Television
Celebrity
Tech
Innovate
Gadget
Foreseeable Future
Mission: Ahead
Upstarts
Work Transformed
Innovative Cities
Style
Arts
Design
Fashion
Architecture
Luxury
Beauty
Video
Travel
Destinations
Food & Drink
Stay
News
Videos
Sports
Football
Tennis
Golf
Motorsport
US Sports
Olympics
Climbing
Esports
Hockey
Watch
Live TV
Digital Studios
CNN Films
HLN
TV Schedule
TV Shows A-Z
CNNVR
Features
As Equals
Call to Earth
Freedom Project
Impact Your World
Inside Africa
2 Degrees
CNN Heroes
All Features
Weather
Climate
Wildfire Tracker
Video
More
Photos
Longform
Investigations
CNN Profiles
CNN Leadership
CNN Newsletters
Work for CNN
World
Watch
Listen
Live TV
FOLLOW CNN
Log In
Terms of Use
Privacy Policy
Manage Cookies+
Ad Choices
Accessibility & CC
About
Newsletters
Transcripts
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.
CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.