UK EDITION SUBSCRIBE: €6 FOR 6 MONTHS LOG IN / REGISTER Independent Big in America Push notifications NEWS SPORT VOICES CULTURE LIFESTYLE TRAVEL PREMIUM MORE SportUFC New UFC star Michael ‘Venom’ Page eyes UK clash with Ian Machado Garry Page beat Kevin Holland on his UFC debut this month, and the Londoner knows who he wants next Alex Pattle Combat Sports Correspondent 6 days ago Comments Kayla Harrison calls out sexist UFC fan over 'disrespectful' question Sign up to our free sport newsletter for all the latest news on everything from cycling to boxing SIGN UP I would like to be emailed about offers, events and updates from The Independent. Read our privacy notice Michael “Venom” Page has called out Ian Machado Garry for a potential UFC clash in the UK, after making a successful debut in the promotion this month. London welterweight Page was a standout in Bellator before making his long-awaited UFC debut, in which he outpointed Kevin Holland at UFC 299 on 9 March. Page, 36, entered the UFC welterweight rankings with his win over Holland, and now “MVP” has turned his attention to the divisive Garry. “Just looking at the rankings, I think the one that makes the most sense would be Ian Garry,” Page said on The MMA Hour on Wednesday (20 March). RECOMMENDED Conor McGregor says Meryl Streep’s negative comments motivated his performance in Road House Conor McGregor claims UFC comeback against Michael Chandler is ‘all systems go’ for summer Tom Aspinall details run-in with Jon Jones: ‘I’m not going to cause more beef’ “Considering he thought I wasn’t going to get past Kevin... There was an interview he did, I’m not sure on what. They asked him his views on me, he was like: ‘Who is he fighting? Oh, he’s not going to beat Kevin. No way he gets past Kevin.’ Very dismissive, which is fine. “People ask me about my views; everyone is entitled to their opinion, there’s no need to be angry about it, but now I’ve gotten past [Holland] and maybe you could stop me?” Page also expressed a desire to fight Irishman Garry in the UK. Ian Machado Garry remains unbeaten as a professional (Getty Images) “It’s perfect,” Page said. “That would be a lot of noise there, and I think it’s a good fight. I think he’s ranked seventh, seven is my lucky number. “He’s a great fighter. Again, no need to be negative towards anybody. He’s sparked a lot of emotional reactions from a lot of people – from his personality, his performances. He’s doing good, but I definitely believe I can beat him, so why not?” Garry last fought in February, beating Geoff Neal via decision at UFC 298. The win kept the 26-year-old unbeaten at 14-0. More aboutMichael PageIan Machado GarryIan Garry Join our commenting forum Join thought-provoking conversations, follow other Independent readers and see their replies Comments Most Popular Prince Harry named in $30m Sean ‘Diddy’ Combs lawsuit Here are all the allegations made against Sean ‘Diddy’ Combs Baltimore Key Bridge – live: Ship’s ‘black box’ may reveal crash cause Queen Camilla gives update on Kate after cancer diagnosis - live Trump unleashes rant aimed at daughter of judge in his hush money case Popular videos 50 Cent reacts after P Diddy’s homes raided by US Home Security Man on £100k a year joint income complains about lack of spare money Structural engineer: How long it will take to rebuild Baltimore Bridge Mysterious 'pyramid' discovered in Antarctica beneath the ice UFC star 'won't watch' Mike Tyson vs Jake Paul fight over fears for boxing legend Man to run London Marathon after re-learning to walk following ski accident First presumed victim of Baltimore bridge collapse named by family What will happen to Ruby Franke’s kids now? Sponsored Features Prince Harry named in $30m Sean ‘Diddy’ Combs lawsuit Here are all the allegations made against Sean ‘Diddy’ Combs Baltimore Key Bridge – live: Ship’s ‘black box’ may reveal crash cause Queen Camilla gives update on Kate after cancer diagnosis - live Trump unleashes rant aimed at daughter of judge in his hush money case GET IN TOUCH Contact us OUR PRODUCTS Subscribe Register Newsletters Donate Today’s Edition Install our app Archive OTHER PUBLICATIONS International editions Independent en Español Independent Arabia Independent Turkish Independent Persian Independent Urdu Evening Standard EXTRAS Advisor Puzzles All topics Betting Offers Voucher codes Competitions and offers Independent Advertising Independent Ignite Syndication Working at The Independent LEGAL Code of conduct and complaints Contributors Cookie policy Donations Terms & Conditions Privacy notice User policies Modern Slavery Act