World
Africa
Americas
Asia
Australia
China
Europe
India
Middle East
United Kingdom
Watch
Audio
Live TV
Log In
World / Middle East
Palestinian Authority prime minister and government resign
By Ibrahim Dahman, CNN
2 minute read
Updated 5:24 AM EST, Mon February 26, 2024
Palestinian Authority Prime Minister Mohammad Shtayyeh attends a cabinet meeting in the occupied West Bank city of Ramallah on December 27. Jaafar Ashtiyeh/AFP/Getty Images
CNN
 — 
Palestinian Authority Prime Minister Mohammed Shtayyeh and his government have submitted their resignations, he announced Monday.
“I would like to inform the honorable council and our great people that I placed the government’s resignation at the disposal of Mr. President (Mahmoud Abbas), last Tuesday, and today I submit it in writing,” Shtayyeh said in a post on Facebook.
The resignation comes as the Palestinian Authority (PA) comes under intense pressure from the United States to reform and improve its governance in the Israeli-occupied West Bank. The PA has long been seen as corrupt by US politicians and Palestinians themselves.
The PA was set up in the mid-1990s as an interim government pending Palestinian independence after the Palestine Liberation Organization signed the Oslo Accords with Israel. It is headquarters in the occupied West Bank city of Ramallah and exercises nominal self-rule in parts of the territory.
The government, which is dominated by the Fatah political party, held administrative control over Gaza until 2007, after Hamas won the 2006 legislative elections in the occupied territories and expelled it from the strip. Israel has rejected the prospect of the PA returning to Gaza after the war, and has dismissed the idea of establishing a Palestinian state in the territories.
The US however favors a reformed PA being in control of both the West Bank and Gaza as part of a future independent state.
Shtayyeh, who was appointed as prime minister in 2019, told CNN in October that there can be no solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict without the United States, but added that the current US administration doesn’t have the political will to end the conflict. “They’re managing it,” he said.
The PA is also very unpopular among Palestinians, who see it as unable to provide security in the face of regular Israeli incursions in the West Bank. A survey conducted by the Palestinian Center for Policy and Survey Research in December showed that more than 60% of Palestinians want the PA to be dissolved. Meanwhile, support for President Abbas, who has held the position since 2005, has collapsed. In the West Bank, 92% of respondents want him to resign, according to the poll.
The prime minister’s post in the PA was set up in 2003, following the Second Palestinian Intifada (uprising) after the US, the European Union and Israel called for reforms. It marked the first real move toward power-sharing by then President Yasser Arafat since the PA was established. At the time, Arafat named Abbas as prime minister. Abbas took over as president after Arafat died in 2004.
Up next
Netanyahu unveils plan for Gaza’s future post-Hamas
5 minute read
Families of killed Palestinian-Americans demand answers of US, Israel
4 minute read
Biden temporarily protects Palestinians in the US from deportation amid conflict abroad
1 minute read
Opinion: Secretary Blinken, this is the uncomfortable truth about America and Israel
6 minute read
Israeli military presents plan for evacuating Gaza’s population from ‘fighting areas’
3 minute read
Most read
One of the world’s biggest cities may be just months away from running out of water
Kenneth Mitchell, ‘Star Trek’ and ‘Marvel’ actor, dead at 49
Takeaways from South Carolina’s Republican primary
Why isn’t the Supreme Court moving faster on Trump’s immunity challenge?
Family describes violent scene left behind on missing American couple’s yacht after alleged hijacking in Grenada
AT&T to reimburse customers after massive network outage
I’m not a gambling addict, but I’ve been to Vegas 44 times. Here’s why
US airman sets himself on fire outside Israeli Embassy in Washington
No, electric vehicle sales aren’t dropping. Here’s what’s really going on
Invasive Jorō spider is surprisingly tolerant of busy urban settings, according to new study
MORE FROM CNN
Netanyahu unveils plan for Gaza’s future post-Hamas
Families of killed Palestinian-Americans demand answers of US, Israel
Biden temporarily protects Palestinians in the US from deportation amid ...
NEWS & BUZZ
One of the world’s biggest cities may be just months away from running out of water
Kenneth Mitchell, ‘Star Trek’ and ‘Marvel’ actor, dead at 49
Takeaways from South Carolina’s Republican primary
Search
World
Africa
Americas
Asia
Australia
China
Europe
India
Middle East
United Kingdom
US Politics
SCOTUS
Congress
Facts First
2024 Elections
Business
Markets
Tech
Media
Calculators
Videos
Health
Life, But Better
Fitness
Food
Sleep
Mindfulness
Relationships
Entertainment
Movies
Television
Celebrity
Tech
Innovate
Gadget
Foreseeable Future
Mission: Ahead
Upstarts
Work Transformed
Innovative Cities
Style
Arts
Design
Fashion
Architecture
Luxury
Beauty
Video
Travel
Destinations
Food & Drink
Stay
News
Videos
Sports
Football
Tennis
Golf
Motorsport
US Sports
Olympics
Climbing
Esports
Hockey
Watch
Live TV
Digital Studios
CNN Films
HLN
TV Schedule
TV Shows A-Z
CNNVR
Features
As Equals
Call to Earth
Freedom Project
Impact Your World
Inside Africa
2 Degrees
CNN Heroes
All Features
Weather
Climate
Wildfire Tracker
Video
More
Photos
Longform
Investigations
CNN Profiles
CNN Leadership
CNN Newsletters
Work for CNN
World
Watch
Listen
Live TV
FOLLOW CNN
Log In
Terms of Use
Privacy Policy
Manage Cookies+
Ad Choices
Accessibility & CC
About
Newsletters
Transcripts
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.
CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.