Enable accessibility EVEN WHEN THE NEWS IS FREE, JOURNALISM IS NOT. SUPPORT INDEPENDENT, FACT-BASED JOURNALISM. DONATE WORLD U.S. ELECTION 2024 POLITICS SPORTS ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS SCIENCE FACT CHECK ODDITIES NEWSLETTERS VIDEO HEALTH PHOTOGRAPHY ... Show Search Israel-Hamas war Trump fraud payment deadline Linda Bean dies Boeing shake-up Shohei Ohtani SPORTS Welsh rugby star Louis Rees-Zammit was the center of attention at NFL’s international player pro day 1 of 2 | Welsh rugby star Louis Rees-Zammit, center, speaks to NFL scouts following pro day for NFL International Player Pathway prospects held at the University of South Florida on Wednesday, March 20, 2024, in Tampa, Fla. (AP Photo/Rob Maaddi) BY ROB MAADDI Updated 5:32 PM UTC, March 22, 2024 Share TAMPA, Fla. (AP) — Welsh rugby star Louis Rees-Zammit was dripping sweat and still catching his breath after finishing up receiving drills when several NFL scouts approached him at the University of South Florida’s pro day. “Do you have an agent?” “Have you ever been injured?” “Did you take the Wonderlic?” “Are you doing this for yourself or your family?” Rees-Zammit politely answered every question before heading off to take a few more from reporters. Rees-Zammit stunned rugby fans when he announced in January that he was leaving the Welsh national team to pursue a dream of playing in the NFL. The talented 23-year-old, one of the best wingers in rugby, now was the center of attention on a football field instead of a pitch. “It’s always been on my mind,” Rees-Zammit said Wednesday. “My dad has been a massive role model to me because he brought me up loving the sport. He played the sport when he was younger so it’s quite easy to love the game because I’ve been watching it from such a young age. So, it’s always been in the back of my head, but it’s just amazing to finally do it now.” Rees-Zammit, whose favorite NFL player growing up was three-time Pro Bowl wide receiver DeSean Jackson, is one of 15 athletes from eight countries participating in the NFL International Player Pathway program. It was established in 2017 to provide elite athletes from around the world the opportunity to earn a spot on an NFL roster and increase the number of international players in the league. READ MORE Browns are re-signing kicker Cade York, AP source says. The former draft pick was cut last season Titans finalizing deal with Chiefs to acquire cornerback L’Jarius Sneed, AP source says Buffalo Bills shore up interior offensive line depth by signing Will Clapp to 1-year contract The prospects spend 10 weeks training at IMG Academy in Bradenton, getting a crash course in practicing the fundamentals of football and learning the intricacies of a game most have never played. They got a chance to showcase their skills at USF’s pro day in front of 51 scouts representing 31 teams — only the Rams weren’t represented. All eyes were on Rees-Zammit when he lined up to run the 40-yard dash. Everyone wanted to see how fast “Rees-Lightning” could run under the pressure of stopwatches but he only clocked a 4.5 on his first try. He improved to an official time of 4.43 on his second run. “A bit disappointed in my 40,” Rees-Zammit said afterward. “Last week, I was getting some really good times. I was getting low 4.3s, high 4.2s. So it is what it is. It’s just what happens on the day. But I know I can run that fast. I’m not trying to make excuses or anything, but I know what I can do and I’m happy with the day and how the day went.” Rees-Zammit is trying out as a running back/wide receiver/returner. He displayed good hands and was quick in and out of his routes. He’s raw but his potential is obvious. On Friday, the league announced Rees-Zammit will visit the Cleveland Browns and New York Jets, with more teams to come. “I’m pretty happy with how I ran my routes, just about how fluid I could be, how I could show off my change of direction, how I can get in and out of breaks,” he said. “I think there are a lot of transferable skills. In rugby, you’re always trying to get your hands on the ball as much as often and you’re always trying to break defenses, look for spaces, be aware. “Catching kickoffs, catch and kick receipts, punt receipts, there’s a lot of transferable skills, and I think running back shows up probably best, getting the ball in my hand early, being able to pick a gap, being able to be aware of the surroundings.” Since the NFL began this program, 37 international players have signed with teams and 18 are currently on rosters. Five players — Jordan Mailata, Jakob Johnson, Efe Obada, Sammis Reyes and David Bada — have been on active rosters. Mailata, a former Australian rugby player, is the star of the program. Selected by the Philadelphia Eagles in the seventh round of the 2018 draft, the 6-foot-8, 365-pound Mailata became the team’s starting left tackle in 2020 and has developed into one of the best players at his position. For the first time this season, each team will have a 17th roster spot on the practice squad specifically available for an international player. Teams also are permitted to elevate an international practice squad player to the active roster a maximum of three times throughout the season — increasing opportunities for players to develop and get a chance to play. Teams will also receive one training camp roster exemption for a qualifying international player. Rees-Zammit, Nigerian wide receiver Praise Olatoke and English offensive lineman Travis Clayton are among the top prospects. All 16 athletes have potential. It comes down to mastering a new craft and impressing scouts. Bayron Matos, a 6-foot-8, 313-pound offensive lineman from the Dominican Republic, has more experience than most. He briefly played for USF’s football team in the spring in 2022 and also played basketball at New Mexico and USF. “I’ve been working really hard to get to the next level,” Matos said. “It’s a fast game. Not everybody can play football. It’s a big boy sport.” ___ AP NFL: https://apnews.com/hub/nfl ROB MAADDI Maaddi is senior NFL writer for The Associated Press. He’s covered the league for 24 years, including the first two decades as the Eagles beat writer. mailto by Taboola Suggested For You ' ' ' ' ' ' LSU coach Kim Mulkey lashes out at Washington Post, threatens legal action LSU coach Kim Mulkey is sharply criticizing and threatening legal action against The Washington Post. AP News Prosecutors in 3 Wisconsin counties decline to pursue charges against Trump committee, lawmaker Prosecutors in three Wisconsin counties are declining to pursue felony charges against former President Donald Trump’s fundraising committee and a Republican state lawmaker related to an effort to unseat Assembly Speaker Robin Vos. AP News Un avance hacia el futuro Advertisement: KIA Haz clic aquí Hazte con el Multivan eHybrid a un precio especial Advertisement: Volkswagen Haz clic aquí Hasta un 35% en tu escapada de Semana Santa. Advertisement: Meliá Hotels Reservar Ahora Enamora en cualquier terreno con Kia Stonic Advertisement: KIA Ver oferta Hazte con el Multivan eHybrid y esta oferta Advertisement: Volkswagen Ver oferta 2x1: cita online y cambia tus neumáticos. Advertisement: Opel Obtén información Indestructible Military Smartwatch Finally on Sale In Spain. How Tough? Advertisement: Best Gadget Discounts Read More Nuevo Alfa Romeo Tonale Tributo Italiano Solo este mes condiciones especiales en Alfa Romeo Tonale Tributo Italiano Advertisement: Alfa Romeo Ver oferta Cómo conseguir placas solares casi gratis en estas provincias Advertisement: Ayudas solares 2024 Del 1 al 31 de Marzo Advertisement: DS Leer más Sumérgete en el lujo italiano: Stelvio. Advertisement: Alfa Romeo Haz clic aquí Deaths of dog walker, 83, and resident of a remote cabin possibly tied to escaped Idaho inmate Authorities are investigating the deaths of an 83-year-old man who was walking his dogs and a 72-year-old man who lived in a remote cabin in connection with the escape of an Idaho white supremacist prison gang member and an accomplice after a Boise hospital ambush. AP News Maryland US Rep. David Trone apologizes for using racial slur at hearing. He says it was inadvertent A Maryland congressman who is running for Senate has apologized for a racial slur that he said he uttered inadvertently during a budget hearing. Democratic Rep. AP News La mejor alarma arrasa en España, no vas a creer este precio Advertisement: Securitas Alarma Más información Haga esto en vez de comprar caros paneles solares ¡Es genial! Advertisement: EcoRenovable Es pecado no conducir el nuevo Abarth 500 eléctrico Advertisement: Abarth Más información Trial starts for Arizona border rancher charged with killing migrant on his property An Arizona rancher has gone on trial in the fatal shooting of a migrant on his property near Mexico. The trial of 75-year-old George Alan Kelly started Friday. AP News Rep. Mike Gallagher says he’s resigning early, leaving House Republicans with thinnest of majorities Rep. Mike Gallagher, a Wisconsin Republican who has spearheaded House pushback against the Chinese government, says he will resign from the House. AP News ¿Cuáles son las profesiones con más futuro? Advertisement: Repsol Más información Girona: Se buscan: 500 personas mayores de 50 años Advertisement: Experto en Audicion ¿Granos y manchas de acné? Advertisement: Eucerin Book Review: ‘Glorious Exploits’ turns classical history into an endearing comedy about tragedy Best friends Lampo and Gelon are potters by trade, but in their souls they’re poets. It’s 412 B.C. and the ancient city of Syracuse doesn’t know what hit it when these two hatch up the best worst idea: They’ll put on a play using the Athenian prisoners of war who are starving to death down in the ro AP News Wind and sun are free, but it’s harder to get renewable energy projects built these days. Here’s why These are turbulent times for wind and solar energy. High interest rates needed to finance renewable projects are coming on top of long waits to buy equipment. AP News Gasolina, eléctrico ¡y ahora con versión híbrida! Descúbrelo en nuestra web. Advertisement: Opel Ver oferta Un avance hacia el futuro Advertisement: KIA Haz clic aquí No espere: los audífonos que necesita hoy en Girona! Advertisement: QuieroEscuchar Prueba ahora British man who poisoned couple with fentanyl and monitored their death via app sentenced to life A British IT worker who poisoned a married couple with the strong opioid fentanyl has been sentenced to a minimum of 37 years in prison for murder. AP News 4 men charged in Moscow attack, showing signs of beatings at hearing as court says 2 accept guilt Four men accused of staging the Russia concert hall attack that killed more than 130 people have appeared before a Moscow court showing signs of severe beatings as they faced formal terrorism charges. AP News Enamora en cualquier terreno con Kia Stonic Advertisement: KIA Ver oferta Trabaja con el Transporter a un precio especial Advertisement: Volkswagen Haz clic aquí Hasta un 35% en tu escapada de Semana Santa. Advertisement: Meliá Hotels Reservar Ahora Book Review: ‘Glorious Exploits’ turns classical history into an endearing comedy about tragedy Best friends Lampo and Gelon are potters by trade, but in their souls they’re poets. It’s 412 B.C. and the ancient city of Syracuse doesn’t know what hit it when these two hatch up the best worst idea: They’ll put on a play using the Athenian prisoners of war who are starving to death down in the ro AP News Wind and sun are free, but it’s harder to get renewable energy projects built these days. Here’s why These are turbulent times for wind and solar energy. High interest rates needed to finance renewable projects are coming on top of long waits to buy equipment. AP News Gasolina, eléctrico ¡y ahora con versión híbrida! Descúbrelo en nuestra web. Advertisement: Opel Ver oferta Un avance hacia el futuro Advertisement: KIA Haz clic aquí No espere: los audífonos que necesita hoy en Girona! Advertisement: QuieroEscuchar Prueba ahora British man who poisoned couple with fentanyl and monitored their death via app sentenced to life A British IT worker who poisoned a married couple with the strong opioid fentanyl has been sentenced to a minimum