US
Crime + Justice
Energy + Environment
Extreme Weather
Space + Science
Watch
Audio
Live TV
Log In
Search continues for missing Americans after alleged yacht hijacking in Grenada, but a violent scene suggests the worst, family says
By Polo Sandoval and Elizabeth Wolfe, CNN
5 minute read
Updated 6:00 AM EST, Mon February 26, 2024
Video Ad Feedback
American couple feared dead after yacht allegedly hijacked
02:31 - Source: CNN
CNN
 — 
Police in the Caribbean are investigating the disappearance of an American couple after escaped inmates in Grenada allegedly hijacked their yacht. Now, their family is bracing for the possibility “they aren’t with us” after the violent scene suggests they may have been killed, but still hope they’ll be found alive.
The Virginia couple, identified by their sailing club as Kathy Brandel and Ralph Hendry, were living out a long-held dream of cruising the Caribbean in their sailing yacht, Simplicity. But the vessel was found abandoned Wednesday off the coast of St. Vincent with the husband and wife nowhere to be found, according to the club, the Salty Dawg Sailing Association.
Police in Grenada have yet to identify the couple but said a trio of prisoners have been recaptured after their February 18 escape. Evidence suggests they may have killed the American occupants of a yacht they allegedly hijacked in St. George to flee to St. Vincent and the Grenadines, another island country that is around 80 miles away, the Royal Grenada Police Force said in a statement.
RELATED ARTICLE
Family describes violent scene left behind on missing American couple’s yacht after alleged hijacking in Grenada
Brandel’s son, Nick Buro, said he still hopes the couple will be found on a Caribbean island.
“The boat itself was ransacked and everything was strewn about in the entire cabin, so clearly there was an altercation of some type that took place on the boat,” Buro told CNN Sunday. “We are concerned for their safety overall because it does appear that they were likely injured.”
Wednesday, the day the abandoned boat was discovered, was Kathy’s 71st birthday, Buro said. March 2, will be Ralph’s 67th birthday, his son Bryan Hendry told CNN.
Buro said his mother and stepfather were veteran boaters who had been planning the trip – their first cruise of the Caribbean – for years.
“They were super careful to be safe all the time,” Buro said. “Everywhere they went everything they did, safety was their top, top concern. So this unfortunate accident, I think, it came out of nowhere for them.”
The couple sold their home and bought Simplicity years ago, throwing themselves into an enthralling life on the water, he said.
“It was their home. Everything they had, they owned, was on that boat. It was their life,” he said. “Kathy worked her whole life and then retired. Ralph worked in financial services and continued to work from the boat. But really what they did was … choose a lifestyle that most of us would never imagine could be done. And they loved every minute of it and they saw many parts of the world and just lived a life of joy and love.”
The suspects in the hijacking – Ron Mitchell, 30; Trevon Robertson, 19; and Abita Stanislaus, 25 – were cooperating with investigators, Royal St. Vincent and the Grenadines Police Force Superintendent Junior O. Simmons said. Prior to the escape, all three had been charged on suspicion of robbery with violence and Mitchell faced other charges, including rape and indecent assault, the Royal Grenada Police Force said.
The US State Department said Friday it is “aware of these reports involving US citizens. We are monitoring the situation and seeking additional information.”
Boat found abandoned by ‘good Samaritan’
The Salty Dawg Sailing Association said it was contacted Wednesday by a boater who spotted the Simplicity anchored and abandoned off the south coast of St. Vincent.
“The good Samaritan had boarded the boat and noted that the owners, Ralph Hendry and Kathy Brandel, were not onboard and found evidence of apparent violence,” the group said. The person also contacted the coast guard, who notified St. Vincent police, the association said.
Grenada police said the escapees were recaptured the same day by the Royal St. Vincent and the Grenadines Police Force.
Ben Osborn, the sailing club’s president, offered his support to the families and said the violence was unheard of.
“This is a very upsetting event and details are still unconfirmed by the authorities, but this does appear to be a tragic event – our hopes and prayers are with Ralph and Kathy and the family who love them,” Osborn said in a statement. “In all my years of cruising the Caribbean, I have never heard of anything like this.”
© Mapbox © OpenStreetMap Improve this map
Seasoned boaters receive outpouring of support
News of Brandel and Hendry’s disappearance has opened a floodgate of support from loved ones, church friends and boating community members who stepped forward willing to help, their families said.
“We want to reach out to the entire cruiser community to express our gratitude for everyone that worked to gather information from eyewitnesses and provide search and rescue support. It means so much to us that so many people cared for Ralph and Kathy as friends and fellow cruisers that they are willing to stop and help in whatever way possible,” Buro and Bryan Hendry said in a statement shared by the sailing club.
They also asked that any boaters not affiliated with the official investigation stand down on their search efforts.
“The only way we feel this situation could be worse would be if anyone was hurt or endangered trying to conduct searches,” the statement read.
The couple also had close ties to their local Christian community, and a prayer service was held Saturday for them, Buro said.
A GoFundMe campaign has been established on behalf of Nick Buro to help fund the recovery of the yacht and the couple’s belongings, funeral costs and support.
CNN’s Sharif Paget and Chris Boyette contributed to this report.
Up next
Family describes violent scene left behind on missing American couple’s yacht after alleged hijacking in Grenada
5 minute read
Two Americans believed dead after escaped prisoners hijack yacht in Grenada
2 minute read
A fierce storm uncovered a mysterious shipwreck. Now another could destroy it
4 minute read
Australian police officer charged with murdering missing couple
2 minute read
Bodies of 5 victims and apparent shooter recovered from Philadelphia-area house set on fire as responding police were shot
4 minute read
Most read
One of the world’s biggest cities may be just months away from running out of water
Kenneth Mitchell, ‘Star Trek’ and ‘Marvel’ actor, dead at 49
Takeaways from South Carolina’s Republican primary
Why isn’t the Supreme Court moving faster on Trump’s immunity challenge?
Family describes violent scene left behind on missing American couple’s yacht after alleged hijacking in Grenada
AT&T to reimburse customers after massive network outage
I’m not a gambling addict, but I’ve been to Vegas 44 times. Here’s why
US airman sets himself on fire outside Israeli Embassy in Washington
No, electric vehicle sales aren’t dropping. Here’s what’s really going on
Invasive Jorō spider is surprisingly tolerant of busy urban settings, according to new study
MORE FROM CNN
Family describes violent scene left behind on missing American couple’s yacht after ...
Two Americans believed dead after escaped prisoners hijack yacht in Grenada
Lawsuit alleges Brian Laundrie shared with his parents that ...
NEWS & BUZZ
One of the world’s biggest cities may be just months away from running out of water
Kenneth Mitchell, ‘Star Trek’ and ‘Marvel’ actor, dead at 49
Takeaways from South Carolina’s Republican primary
Search
World
Africa
Americas
Asia
Australia
China
Europe
India
Middle East
United Kingdom
US Politics
SCOTUS
Congress
Facts First
2024 Elections
Business
Markets
Tech
Media
Calculators
Videos
Health
Life, But Better
Fitness
Food
Sleep
Mindfulness
Relationships
Entertainment
Movies
Television
Celebrity
Tech
Innovate
Gadget
Foreseeable Future
Mission: Ahead
Upstarts
Work Transformed
Innovative Cities
Style
Arts
Design
Fashion
Architecture
Luxury
Beauty
Video
Travel
Destinations
Food & Drink
Stay
News
Videos
Sports
Football
Tennis
Golf
Motorsport
US Sports
Olympics
Climbing
Esports
Hockey
Watch
Live TV
Digital Studios
CNN Films
HLN
TV Schedule
TV Shows A-Z
CNNVR
Features
As Equals
Call to Earth
Freedom Project
Impact Your World
Inside Africa
2 Degrees
CNN Heroes
All Features
Weather
Climate
Wildfire Tracker
Video
More
Photos
Longform
Investigations
CNN Profiles
CNN Leadership
CNN Newsletters
Work for CNN
US
Watch
Listen
Live TV
FOLLOW CNN
Log In
Terms of Use
Privacy Policy
Manage Cookies+
Ad Choices
Accessibility & CC
About
Newsletters
Transcripts
© 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.
CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.