LOG IN
OPINION
The Point
Conversations and insights about the moment.
Updated 
2 hours ago
Share full article
2 hours ago
Katherine MillerOpinion Writer and Editor
The Tip Sheet: Will the Anti-Trump Vote Hold Steady in Michigan?
Elizabeth Bick for The New York Times
Every Monday morning on The Point, we kick off the week with a tipsheet on the latest in the presidential campaign. Here’s what we’re looking at this week:
In Michigan, Democrats are voting Tuesday in their state primary. Activists have argued people should vote “uncommitted” as a protest against President Biden’s approach to Israel and Gaza. Michelle Goldberg interviewed some of the organizers and wrote about the campaign last week. There’s been a bit of an argument from some Democrats that votes for uncommitted will damage Biden in the fall, but in my opinion, efforts like this tend to identify a problem for a candidate or highlight voter unhappiness that already exists.
Republicans in Michigan are voting too, and Nikki Haley is continuing on. She’ll lose again, barring shocking events I can’t imagine, but she seems OK with that, in part because she’s winning a real number of voters. One thing that’s been interesting in Iowa, New Hampshire and now South Carolina over the weekend is that the share of the non-Trump vote has been a little bigger than I think people expected (nearly 40 percent on Saturday), which I wrote a little about over the weekend. It’s worth considering that maybe Republican-leaning voters aren’t as consolidated around the Trump vision of America as it sometimes seems. But maybe Michigan will complicate that picture with an even more emphatic Trump performance.
One thing that’s not on deadline for this week, but is pertinent for the next few weeks in general, is the pair of huge civil penalties against Trump in New York and how he will comply with them. Our newsroom colleagues published a super interesting story over the weekend about the logistics of securing a bond like this, the terms of those bonds, and different concerns that both Trump and the bond issuer might have. You’re always learning about something new with Trump.
It’s very difficult to wrap my head around this year without better understanding if, how and when the Trump criminal trials might proceed. There will be another hearing this week about whether the Fulton County district attorney’s office will be penalized or removed in the Trump case over the personal relationship between two prosecutors. And at any moment, we could hear from the Supreme Court on what the justices plan to do about immunity in the federal Jan. 6 case.
Show less
Feb. 24, 2024
Zeynep TufekciOpinion Columnist
A Farewell to Flaco, the Ultimate New Yorker
David Lei/David Lei, via Associated Press
For New Yorkers, the death of Flaco — the beloved Central Eurasian eagle-owl that escaped from the Central Park Zoo a year ago after someone cut the mesh wires to his small cage — is a painful ending to a glorious year of free flight.
The city loved Flaco because he represented so much of New York’s spirit and ideals, which we may not always live up to but we recognize on sight.
Show more
ADVERTISEMENT
Feb. 23, 2024
Serge SchmemannEditorial Board Member
Netanyahu’s Gaza Plan Is a Rebuff to Biden
By no coincidence, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel released his vision for a postwar Gaza in the wee hours of Friday, just before William Burns, the director of the C.I.A., was preparing to meet in Paris with senior officials from Egypt, Qatar and Israel to pursue a deal for the release of Israeli hostages and a pause in the fighting. It was clear where the prime minister wanted the headlines to focus.
Netanyahu’s plan was in many ways antithetical to what the Biden administration has been trying to achieve. Among other things, it called for Israeli “operational freedom of action in the entire Gaza Strip without a time limit,” while Washington has been trying to avoid a push into the city of Rafah, packed with displaced Gazans, and it envisioned a buffer zone that would further reduce the territory of the Gaza Strip, already one of the most crowded places on earth. And it made no mention of the Palestinian Authority in any future administration of Gaza, as Washington envisions.
Show more
Feb. 23, 2024
Mara GayEditorial Board Member, reporting from North Charleston, S.C.
The Quiet Bliss of a Routine City Council Meeting
Locust-swarms of political operatives and national news reporters have descended on South Carolina, watching to see if Nikki Haley can mount a respectable stand against Trumpism in Saturday’s Republican primary in the state she once led.
I needed an escape from the frantic outcroppings of Haley signs scattered throughout Charleston’s colorful, cobblestoned streets (and at least one life-size cutout of the former governor).
Show more
ADVERTISEMENT
Feb. 23, 2024
Paul KrugmanOpinion Columnist
Grocery Prices Haven’t Doubled. And They’re Leveling Off.
Anyone who writes about declining inflation receives a lot of hostile comments that run roughly like this: “You elite types don’t know what it’s really like for ordinary Americans! Grocery prices have doubled and are still soaring!”
Actually, they haven’t and they aren’t.
Show more
Feb. 23, 2024
Julie HoOpinion Editorial Assistant
How an Angelic Doll Helped Win the Vote for Women
Incamerastock/Alamy
Before Mickey Mouse came along in the late 1920s, Kewpie dolls, cherubic and irresistible, were the reigning American toy fad being exported around the world. Their round cheeks and impish glance, embodying girlish innocence, stole the hearts of children and adults alike. The New-York Historical Society is featuring their creator, Rose O’Neill, as one of the women who contributed paid and unpaid labor to the engine of American society in the exhibition “Women’s Work.”
The sprawling Kewpie legacy, which began just as women started joining the work force and accumulating consumer power, was first used for commercial effect. In an early form of brand collaboration, the Kewpie character helped sell Jell-O as a fashionable food. An entrepreneur in Japan later picked up on the craze and created a best-selling brand of mayonnaise bearing the Kewpie image.
Show more
ADVERTISEMENT
Feb. 23, 2024
David FirestoneDeputy Editor, the Editorial Board
Nikki Haley Can’t Have It Both Ways on Embryos
Ruth Fremson/The New York Times
Nikki Haley is often described as venturing carefully or treading a delicate line when it comes to deeply personal issues like abortion and reproductive rights. But that’s a very generous interpretation of what she’s really doing, which is trying to have it both ways and fool all sides into believing she’s empathetic to their positions.
For months, she’s been saying that she would have signed into law a six-week abortion ban as governor of South Carolina (attention, evangelicals) but that every state should be free to make its own decision (attention, moderates who might still choose her over Donald Trump).
Show more
Feb. 22, 2024
Ariel KaminerOpinion Editor for Ideas and Investigations
Where Yale Has Gone, Other Universities Will Follow
Christopher Capozziello for The New York Times
Yale just stirred a tablespoon of additional anxiety into the already potent stew in which selective-college-bound high school students marinate. After four years of “test optional” undergraduate admissions, the university on Thursday announced a new “test flexible” approach. Scores are required, but applicants can choose the SAT, the ACT, the International Baccalaureate exam or subject-based Advanced Placement exams.
Yale was one of the many colleges that suspended their test requirements in response to the constraints of the Covid pandemic. A few, including M.I.T. and Dartmouth, have recently reinstated the requirement.
Show more
ADVERTISEMENT
Feb. 22, 2024
Peter CoyOpinion Writer
Two Grocery Chains May Be a Little Too Close
People usually warm up to each other before they get married, but companies aren’t supposed to act that way. Collusion before a merger is illegal. It’s fight, fight, fight right up to the wedding day.
On Feb. 14 — Valentine’s Day, no less — the State of Colorado accused two supermarket chains, Kroger and Albertsons, of behaving nicely toward each other before tying the knot. Whether that’s true or not, the mere accusation creates problems for the two chains, which were already struggling to keep the merger on track.
Show more
Feb. 22, 2024
Jacqueline BatesOpinion Photography Director
Documenting the Unseen Lives of America’s Homeless Families
David Wooten and Terri Masterson in Nashville.Tamara Reynolds for The New York Times
Early in our conception of our latest story on America’s growing homelessness crisis, we knew we wanted to hear directly from the people experiencing homelessness themselves instead of simply writing about them. As a photo editor, I knew I wanted this ethos to guide the photography for this project as well. Photography of people without stable housing can often feel voyeuristic and invasive. Rarely are they seen as active participants in their own stories. Portraying people who are often at their most vulnerable, at times surviving the worst crisis of their lives, requires a level of empathy and care.
In Nashville, photographer Tamara Reynolds was already doing this kind of vital work. Born and raised in Nashville, she published a book called “The Drake,” a series of photographs taken over the course of four years, documenting the unseen lives of people that many choose to overlook.
Show more
ADVERTISEMENT
Feb. 21, 2024
Claire GordonSupervising Editor, “The Ezra Klein Show”
Readers Respond to Ezra Klein’s Discussion of an Open Convention
In the eight years of “The Ezra Klein Show” podcast, no episode has broken through as much as last Friday’s audio essay, “Democrats Have a Better Option Than Biden.” In that essay, Klein argued that President Biden’s age hadn’t impaired his ability to be president, but it had impaired his ability to run an effective re-election campaign, and so he urged Democrats to pick a different nominee at their convention in August.
The response from listeners and readers was overwhelming, and many raised questions and concerns about Klein’s proposed solution. On Tuesday, a follow-up conversation with Elaine Kamarck, a historian of conventions, explained exactly how that process would work, and readers had a lot of thoughts, many of them skeptical.
Show more
Feb. 21, 2024
Farah StockmanEditorial Board Member
If Biden Limits Asylum at the Border, Will It Matter?
Patrick T. Fallon/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images
The Biden administration has released yet another trial balloon on immigration policy, hinting that it may go it alone after congressional Republicans refused to deal with the problem. NBC News reported on Wednesday that the administration is considering raising the standards required to qualify for asylum on its own, hoping to stem the tide of human beings trying to cross the southern border daily.
On one level, it’s not a crazy idea. It’s an open secret that many people ask for political asylum not because they are in fear of being tortured or killed by their governments, but because they are desperate to work in the United States to feed their families. Seeking asylum is one of the few ways they can get permission to do that.
Show more
ADVERTISEMENT
Feb. 21, 2024
Adam SternberghOpinion Culture Editor
The Movie You Need to Hear
“The Zone of Interest,” the film by director Jonathan Glazer that’s nominated for five Academy Awards, is now available for you to watch at home.
Don’t do it.
Show more
Feb. 21, 2024
David FirestoneDeputy Editor, the Editorial Board
Amazon Tries to Disrupt the American Labor Movement
Erik S Lesser/EPA, via Shutterstock
It’s been clear for a while that Amazon doesn’t want unions at its warehouses. The company has fought every attempt to organize its workers, targeting union supporters, holding anti-union meetings and challenging union elections. But last week Amazon went a big step further and tried to upend the whole American labor movement.
In a legal filing on Thursday, the company argued that the National Labor Relations Board, which supervises and enforces labor law, was unconstitutional. It came up with various spurious reasons for this argument — the board violates the Constitution’s separation of powers, its actions violate Amazon’s Fifth Amendment rights, it violates Article III by acting like a court, etc. — but the upshot was that it doesn’t think any federal agency has the right to oversee its relationship with its employees.
Show more
ADVERTISEMENT
Feb. 20, 2024
David FrenchOpinion Columnist
The Court Gives Schools Room to Run on Diversity, for Now
On Tuesday morning, the Supreme Court refused to hear what is perhaps the most significant and contentious racial diversity case since the court struck down the use of race-based affirmative action in most college admissions decisions. One should never read too much into a decision not to take a case, but the court’s decision not to hear Coalition for TJ v. Fairfax County School Board is notable nonetheless.
At issue is the ability of public officials to achieve a desired racially diverse outcome, but through race-neutral means. In Students for Fair Admission v. Harvard, the Supreme Court held that a school can’t explicitly consider the race of an applicant in an admissions decision, but are there other ways to create a diverse student body?
Show more
Feb. 20, 2024
Michelle CottleOpinion Domestic Correspondent
Democratic Candidates Can’t Escape the War in Gaza
Jason Andrew for The New York Times
It’s not just President Biden who is feeling the political heat over the war in Gaza. I spent the long weekend in Los Angeles checking in on the top Democratic candidates in the California Senate race. The highlight was trailing after Representative Adam Schiff and his wife in a Lunar New Year parade around Chinatown on Saturday afternoon.
Smallish local parades, chock-full of area officials tooling along slowly in borrowed convertibles — Schiff scored the white Porsche! — can serve as a fascinating barometer of how the public is feeling about particular issues and candidates. For the most part, the crowds along Saturday’s short route were a festive bunch: cheering, chowing down and setting off giant confetti poppers.
Show more
ADVERTISEMENT
Feb. 20, 2024
Isvett VerdeOpinion Staff Editor
Bidding Farewell to a Mother of the Trans Community
I was late when I arrived at St. Patrick’s Cathedral in Manhattan on Thursday morning to celebrate the life of Cecilia Gentili, a transgender woman who worked to empower trans women of color, sex workers and immigrants.
A throng of people on the steps flowed slowly into the church. It was a bitterly cold morning, but that didn’t stop many from wearing the slinkiest of dresses.
Show more
Feb. 20, 2024
Patrick HealyDeputy Opinion Editor
A Big Opportunity to Define Trump as Unacceptable
Haiyun Jiang for The New York Times
We kick off every week on The Point with a tip sheet on the latest in the presidential campaign.
Our latest Times Opinion focus group discussion with 13 undecided independent voters included a striking result: 11 of the 13 said they would vote for Donald Trump if the election were held now, and only two said they would vote for President Biden. The reason: overwhelming concern about the economy.
But I was less surprised by the big vote for Trump than by this: The group didn’t blame Trump for things he was responsible or accountable for.
For instance, several people linked their economic troubles to Covid, but they didn’t put any blame on Trump for that. Some were upset with the end of abortion rights nationally, but they didn’t tie that to Trump’s Supreme Court appointments. Several wanted bipartisanship, but they didn’t blame Trump for his hand in sinking the recent bipartisan border deal. One person, a Latina, blamed Trump for worsening racism in the country and recounted a searing incident that happened to her — but she was among the 11 who would vote for him anyway.
The takeaway: Biden and the Democrats still have a big opportunity to define Trump. A lot of our focus group participants — and many voters — see Trump as an acceptable option in November, yet they don’t know or remember a lot about him. Average voters don’t eat and breathe politics; several in our group weren’t well informed about Trump and abortion, for instance.
So how do you define Trump as unacceptable for these undecided voters? The economy is the key issue, no question, but I think abortion could also be influential in some battleground states — especially after the Times scoop Friday by Maggie Haberman, Jonathan Swan and Lisa Lerer about Trump privately favoring a 16-week national abortion ban (with some exceptions).
Abortion initiatives could be on the November ballot in at least two swing states — Arizona and Nevada — and Democratic fund-raising nationally could explode if Biden and his allies make a strong case that Trump would impose an abortion ban in California, New York and other blue areas. Biden is heading to California on Tuesday for three days of fund-raising, and “Trump’s abortion ban” is a phrase that, in eight months, might just break through to average voters like those in our focus group.
ADVERTISEMENT
Feb. 16, 2024
Jesse WegmanEditorial Board Member
Donald Trump, the Business Fraud
Donald Trump remains who he has always been. For his rabid fans, this fact is key to the former president’s appeal. But Trump’s hollow core was central, too, for Justice Arthur Engoron of the New York state trial court, who on Friday handed down an eye-popping $355 million verdict against the former president, his grown sons and his business associates for fraudulently overvaluing his real estate assets for years in order to obtain bank loans.
Over 92 pages, Engoron eviscerated Trump, his sons and his entire business operation as consummate frauds. Trump lied to his lenders. He lied to insurance companies. He lied to the court in refusing to admit error.
Show more
Feb. 16, 2024
Lauren KelleyDeputy Op-Ed Editor
Trump Is Picking a Number Out of a Hat
Abortion has loomed large in this presidential contest, coming as it does less than two years after the demise of Roe v. Wade.
That dynamic was further cemented on Friday when The Times’s Maggie Haberman and Jonathan Swan reported that Donald Trump has privately discussed supporting a federal ban on abortions after 16 weeks of pregnancy, with exceptions. How did he land on that number? Among other reasons, Haberman and Swan report, he likes it because it sounds good.
Show more
ADVERTISEMENT
Feb. 16, 2024
Bret StephensOpinion Columnist
Putin and His Enablers Should Be Held Responsible for Navalny’s Death
Hannibal Hanschke/EPA, via Shutterstock
In the early days of the Soviet Union, Communist Party leaders would arrange carefully managed tours for sympathetic Western journalists and intellectuals, who would file reports about productive collectivized farms, happy factory workers and kindly comrades in the Kremlin. “I have seen the future, and it works,” was how Lincoln Steffens, the muckraking American journalist, put it after his own visit to the worker’s paradise in 1919.
Usually left out of those reports: the midnight arrests, the summary executions, the gulag, the forced famines leaving millions of victims.
Show more
Feb. 16, 2024
Kathleen KingsburyOpinion Editor
Navalny Had No Option but to Fight
I first met Aleksei Navalny toward the end of 2010, during a fellowship he was doing at Yale. It was before he’d go on to lead millions of Russians into the streets of Moscow and other major cities in opposition to President Vladimir Putin. Before his fierce, striking blue eyes graced the covers of magazines and newspapers across the globe. Long before, as is now being reported, he would die in a Russian prison near the Arctic Circle on Friday at age 47.
That day, over lunch, those eyes were filled with warmth and joy as Navalny told stories of his young children learning math and adjusting to life in America. He radiated pride as he spoke about how he and colleagues were using a deep knowledge of Russian law and bureaucracy, as well as viral video, social media, GIFs and other novel techniques, to expose Putin and his cronies’ corruption.
Show more
Share full article
More In Opinion
Sex and the Capital City
Opinion
Pool photo by Al Drago
Biden Is in Danger of Losing Michigan and, With It, the Whole Election
Opinion
Peter Baker for The New York Times
Putin Has Already Lost
Opinion
Natalia Kolesnikova/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images
Where Did the ‘True Detective’ Magic Go? To Another Show.
Opinion
Alain Pilon
It’s Not as Easy as Just Getting Biden to Drop Out
Opinion
Photo Illustration by Rachel Stern for The New York Times
Editors’ Picks
If You Liked ‘Saltburn,’ Consider This Much Better Movie
Recorded Picture Company
How to Pack for a Two-Week Trip With One Small Suitcase
Ilya Milstein
Shane Gillis Bounced Back From ‘S.N.L.’ Debacle. On Saturday, He’ll Host.
via Netflix
Trending in The Times
Opinion: A More Conservative Case for How to Get More Americans to Marry
Why Artists Rule New York
What Does It Mean to Dress Like an American?
I Spent a Week Rescuing Food From the Trash. Here’s What I Ate.
Man Pleads Guilty to Insider Trading After Overhearing Wife’s Work Calls
Rob Reiner on ‘the Greatest Single Performance’ in U.S. Cinema
Jayo Archer, Motorcyclist Who Landed Triple Flip, Dies While Practicing
Flaco’s Crash Might Have Been More Than Bad Luck. Here’s What We Know.
Chuck Mawhinney, 74, Dies; Deadliest Sniper in Marine Corps History
Naked? With Strangers? In Europe, It’s How You Relax at the Spa.
ADVERTISEMENT
Go to Home Page »
NEWS
Home Page
World
Coronavirus
U.S.
Politics
New York
Business
Tech
Science
Sports
Wildfire Tracker
Obituaries
Today'S Paper
Corrections
Trending
OPINION
Today'S Opinion
Columnists
Editorials
Guest Essays
Letters
Sunday Opinion
Opinion Video
ARTS
Today'S Arts
Art & Design
Books
Best Sellers Book List
Dance
Movies
Music
Pop Culture
Television
Theater
Video: Arts
LIVING
Automotive
Games
Education
Food
Health
Jobs
Love
Magazine
Parenting
Real Estate
Style
T Magazine
Travel
MORE
Reader Center
The Athletic
Wirecutter
Cooking
Headway
Live Events
The Learning Network
Podcasts
Video
Graphics
TimesMachine
Times Store
Manage My Account
Gift Articles
NYTLicensing
SUBSCRIBE
Home Delivery
Digital Subscriptions
Games
Cooking
Email Newsletters
Corporate Subscriptions
Education Rate
Mobile Applications
Replica Edition
International
Canada
Español
中文网
© 2024 The New York Times Company
NYTCoContact UsAccessibilityWork with usAdvertiseT Brand StudioYour Ad ChoicesPrivacy PolicyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpSubscriptionsManage Privacy Preferences