Sign in Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Travel Search BBC Home Football Cricket Formula 1 Rugby U Tennis Golf Athletics Cycling More Basketball Scores & Fixtures Tables NBA: Anthony Davis and LeBron James lead LA Lakers to win over Indiana Pacers 6 hours ago Comments NBA highlights: James & Davis star as Lakers score 150 points Anthony Davis and LeBron James starred as the Los Angeles Lakers put in their highest-scoring performance in 37 years to hold off the Indiana Pacers. The Lakers won 150-145 with 36 points and 16 rebounds from Davis, while James added 26 points and 10 assists. Indiana scored 46 points in the final quarter but the Lakers hit 10 in the last minute for a third successive win. "We allowed them to score 145 so it was terrible defensively but we can do what we want offensively," said Davis. "But we've got to defend, especially when we've got a team [in trouble] like that. We don't need to give them life, but at this point in the season, a win is a win." The Lakers, who start a run of six away games on Tuesday, are ninth in the Western Conference and have 11 matches remaining in the 82-game regular season. The top eight qualify for the end-of season play-offs. The Pacers are sixth in the Eastern Conference and have 10 games to play. ‘Doing something right!’ - reaction to Lakers’ highest score since 1987 Elsewhere, Giannis Antetokounmpo scored 30 points and grabbed a season-high 19 rebounds as the Milwaukee Bucks beat the Oklahoma City Thunder 118-93 to consolidate second position in the Eastern Conference. The defeat leaves the Thunder fractionally behind reigning NBA champions the Denver Nuggets in the battle to win the Western Conference. The Minnesota Timberwolves are also in the running, with just one win separating the top three after they edged past the Golden State Warriors 114-110. Steph Curry contributed 31 points for the Warriors. The Los Angeles Clippers remain fourth despite a 121-107 defeat by the Philadelphia 76ers. The New Orleans Pelicans, who are one place behind the Clippers, heaped more misery on the Detroit Pistons with a 114-101 victory over the NBA's worst side. The Pistons have now lost 59 of their 71 games. And the Miami Heat kept up their play-off push in the Eastern Conference with a 121-84 win over the higher ranked Cleveland Cavaliers. Related Topics Basketball Related Internet Links British Basketball League British Basketball NBA International Basketball Federation (Fiba) UK Sport The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. View comments Top Stories LIVEInternational news conferences and football latest Elite sportswomen chasing medals on 'less than minimum wage' 8 hours ago 'Damned if you do, damned if you don't' - sportswomen on trans debate 8 hours ago Elsewhere on the BBC The true story of the Army’s 'golden egg' agent The Big Cases investigates the true story of a spy in suburbia Explore the untold story of the 'Blackout Ripper' The extraordinary case of wartime London's infamous killer The best of British cuisine Watch as top chefs from across the UK pour their hearts onto the plate Drift off to the violin Izzy Judd guides us through a peaceful meditative special of the Sleeping Forecast Elsewhere in Sport Elite sportswomen chasing medals on 'less than minimum wage' 'Damned if you do, damned if you don't' - sportswomen on trans debate 'It's on another level, completely alien in darts' All you need to know about Euro 2024 play-off finals Chelsea, Man City or Arsenal - who will win the WSL? 'From the operating table to victory - a redemption story for Sainz' Watch: Moult's stunner from near halfway line England will return 'stronger' - Packer proud of 100 caps England thrash Italy despite Beckett red card 'A brutal and timely reminder of England's problems' 'A beautiful day' - Eriksson fulfils dream to manage Liverpool Paris becomes first woman to finish Barkley Marathons 'I nearly quit - but now I'm ready for Olympic dogfight' Join the BBC Sport WhatsApp channels Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Travel Earth Video Live Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised Newsletters Why you can trust the BBC Advertise with us Do not share or sell my info © 2024 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.