An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Español Call us at 1-844-USAGOV1 All topics and services About the U.S. and its government Government benefits Housing help Scams and fraud Taxes Travel Home Jobs, labor laws and unemployment How to find a job Where to look for a job Jobs, labor laws and unemployment Unemployment benefits How to find a job Where to look for a job Job training Retirement planning tools Labor laws and worker protection How to find a job These government websites can help you find a job in the private sector and state and federal government jobs. Search for a job Look for jobs in these databases. Use keywords or job titles to search for openings. Search for jobs on CareerOneStop Search for jobs in your state's job bank Search the American Job Center database Search for jobs in your local newspaper and its website Visit a public library to get in-person help with job searches and more Search for a government job Federal government jobs USAJOBS is the central place to find and apply for federal jobs at U.S. government agencies around the world. Search USAJOBS Federal jobs for special groups There are programs to help certain groups start federal careers. There are unique hiring paths if you are a: Veteran Military spouse Student or recent graduate Person with disability Native American Learn about USAJOBS hiring paths for specific groups. State government jobs Find jobs in your state or territory's government. Visit your state government website. Look for a "careers" or "work with us" link. If there isn’t a link on the website, search the website, using a phrase like "work for the state of Ohio." LAST UPDATED: December 11, 2023 SHARE THIS PAGE: Have a question? Ask a real person any government-related question for free. They will get you the answer or let you know where to find it. Call USAGov Chat with USAGov What you think matters! Government information All topics and services Directory of U.S. government agencies and departments Branches of government About us About USAGov Privacy and security policies Accessibility policy Report a website issue Website usage data For federal agencies Partner with us Read our blog For media USAGov Outreach Feature articles Sign up to receive email updates Enter your email Sign up USAGov Contact Center Ask USA.gov a question at 1-844-USAGOV1 (1-844-872-4681) Find us on social media USAGov is the official guide to government information and services