Register Sign In How to Write a CV (Curriculum Vitae) in 2024 [31+ Examples] 27 December 202315 min read our services are featured in Content Top ↑ Do You Need a CV or a Resume - What’s The Difference? Why Use a CV Builder How to Format Your CV Get The CV Layout Right How to Add Your Contact Information in a CV (The Right Way) How to Grab the HR Manager’s Attention With a CV Summary or Objective How to Show Off Your Work Experience (And Stand Out) Skills Section on Your CV Education Section on Your CV Other Sections for CV Certificate and Awards Languages Hobbies and interest Personal projects Top 3 CV Examples Graduate CV Example Academic CV Example Executive CV Example Next Steps in Your Job Search - Cover Letter & Interview How to Make a Cover Letter How to Ace Your Interview Key Takeaways Share this article 502 306 191 449 Research says that on average, recruiters look at CVs for up to 6 seconds - at most! That sounds a little harsh, right? You spend days, weeks even, crafting THE picture-perfect CV that represents you in a nutshell - with bells and whistles and all. And what does the recruiter do? They glance it over for a few seconds (again, if lucky), and move on. It might sound unfair, exactly how are you supposed to capture someone’s attention in a matter of seconds? Well, we have an answer. Are you ready? It’s long and might be a little time-consuming. And no, there are no shortcuts. If you want to perfect your CV, you might have to grease up your elbows, get your reading glasses, and make sure every little detail is polished to perfection. Once you do that though, believe us - it’s going to be worth it. After all, that’s a small price to pay for landing the dream job you’ll be looking forward to. By building a near-perfect CV, you’re essentially investing in yourself, and your future. How do you do that? Be sure to read on and you’ll see: Do you need a CV or a Resume - & What’s the Difference? Use the right CV builder Pick the right CV format Get the CV layout right Add your contact information (the right way) Grab the HR manager’s attention with a CV summary or objective Show off your work experience (and stand out) Include relevant skills within your CV Include education within your CV Include other sections Top 3 CV examples Next steps in your job search - cover letter & interview Key takeaways Let’s take it one step at a time. Do You Need a CV or a Resume - What’s The Difference? You might have noticed that when you’re applying for a job, some say to send your CV, while others prefer your resume. So, what’s the deal? Aren’t they technically the same thing? The answer: it depends on where you’re from. In all of Europe - they are indeed the same thing and can be used interchangeably. If you’re applying for a job that asks for a CV, you should know that it’s the same as a resume. Now, if you’re from the United States, it’s a bit different. A resume is a one-page summary of your work experience and background to the job you’re applying to. A CV, meanwhile, is a longer academic diary that includes all your experience, publications and more. The main difference is that a resume is about one page (max. two), whereas the CV can be longer. A resume is used for job hunting in all industries, and the CV is used for jobs and admissions in academia. And finally, the resume is tailored to the specific job you’re applying to, and the CV is a comprehensive overview. So, in short, CV vs. Resume - what’s the difference? If you’re from Europe - they’re basically the same thing. If not, a resume is a one-page summary of your work experience and background. And your CV is a longer academic diary that includes all your experience, certificates, and publications. Simple, right? Since you’re reading this guide, you probably want to learn how to make a regular, job-search CV. If that’s the case, then you’ve come to the right place. For this, we recommend going with one of Novoresume’s CV templates. What, you didn’t think you’d get away with using a simple text editor CV template, did you? Nope, to stand out with your CV, you need something much more powerful. Why Use a CV Builder Most people use the default Word templates to create their CVs. The problem with that is that these default templates are often bland and lifeless. You want your CV to stand out, not fit right in with the rest of them. Your average CV template is also a total pain to work with. Imagine this scenario... You spend 2+ hours aimlessly trying to make your resume contents fit within the default template layout. And then, when you make one more tiny tweak, the whole thing gets completely messed up. You start looking for a better CV template online and find one that costs $19.99 or more. You painfully fork out the money and hope that this CV template is better than the ones you’ve tried so far. Here’s a spoiler: it’s probably not. Word is for writing an essay in university, not for creating a resume. Looking for a significantly easier experience? Novoresume’s CV builder helps you build a 1 page CV for free (with a premium version if you’re looking for the extra push). It comes with plenty of customization, so, even though you work a template, you get to personalize it to your heart's content.. And the icing on the cake? All of our CV templates are optimized for Applicant Tracking Systems (ATS). What does this mean in normal terms, you ask? Well, it simply means that the CV screening software that the HR manager is using will be able to read your CV for sure, giving you a much better chance to get past the screening process. How to Format Your CV Alright, let’s get down to brass tacks. So, what goes into a CV, exactly? Now, there is no golden rule and not every CV has the same sections. A lot depends on your experience, and where you’re applying to. Though, some parts do stay the same. The Must-have Sections to Include in a CV: Contact information CV Summary or objective Work experience Skills Education Optional Sections to Include in a CV: Certifications and awards Languages Personal projects Volunteer Experience We’re going to cover all of those sections step-by-step. Before we do that, though, let’s discuss how to... Get The CV Layout Right The first thing a job recruiter notices about any CV is the layout. Things like: Is everything easy to find in one glance? Are the colors, fonts, and headings consistent? Is all the information well-organized? Here are some of the best practices when it comes to getting your CV layout right: Keep it one page in length - You should only go for 2 pages if you’re confident you can’t summarize yourself in 1 page. Don’t waste your precious CV real estate on your life story - no one’s going to read it! Clear and consistent section heading - Keep the colors, font size, headings consistent so that it’s easy on the eyes. We’d recommend using a font that stands out, but not too much. Do use: Ubuntu, Roboto, Overpass, etc. Don’t use: comic sense. White-space - Make sure there are enough margins and space between the text so that the whole thing is easy on the eyes. Keep the details clear - pick the right font size (14-16pt for section titles, 11-12pt for normal text). Finally, save your resume as PDF, as Word might change up your CV formatting. One last thing you might want to think about is whether your CV is going to be the traditional type or the creative one. If you’re pursuing a career in a more traditional industry - legal, banking, finance, etc., you might want to stick to the first one. If you’re applying to a tech startup though, where imagination and innovation are valued within the company value, you can go for something creative. How to Add Your Contact Information in a CV (The Right Way) Your contact information is arguably the most important part of your CV. After all, even if you get everything right, it’s not going to matter much if they can’t contact you. Make sure you triple-check everything in your contact information, word for word, and that it’s up to date. Contact Section of Your CV Should Include: First name, Last name - the generally preferred format is Name, Last name. Phone number - make sure to include your country code if applying outside your country. Email address - your email should be professional, ideally along the lines of [name][last name]@email.com Title - your professional title, either your desired job or the one you’re applying for word for word. Location - are you located in the area? Relocating there in a month or two? Or maybe you’re looking for a relocation sponsor? Aside from the basic contact information, you also might want to consider putting your social media handles - as long as they’re relevant. For every other social media channel, consider how they reflect your work. For example: LinkedIn - many people ask for a LinkedIn link when applying for a job. As long as your LinkedIn profile is complete and optimized (as it should), feel free to include your LinkedIn URL in your CV. Twitter - in very specific cases (e.g. marketing or journalism position), you could include your Twitter profile if you’re active, have a decent amount of followers and a writing style relevant to the position. Quora - do you have a lot of authority on a specific topic in your field with a decent amount of followers? This can convince the HR manager that you’re really the best expert they can hire. Stack Overflow / Github - only for developers, coders, and computer scientists. Medium - only for freelance writers, bloggers, and so on. Anything else - got a relevant personal website, blog, or a YouTube channel? Use your discretion if it’s relevant. All clear? Now let’s discuss how to stand out within your CV summary or objective. How to Grab the HR Manager’s Attention With a CV Summary or Objective Your CV summary or objective is your attempt at an important first impression. Make sure the language you use is clear, and the HR manager doesn’t have to read it a few times to understand it - because they won’t. Does it pass the 6-second test? Your CV summary or objective is your attempt at an elevator pitch with 2-3 sentences. As a rule of thumb, if you have more than 2 years of work experience - go for a CV summary. If not - go for a CV objective. Let’s break that down. Your CV summary should include: Jobs and years of work experience. Relevant achievements and responsibilities. What you look for, your goal. With that said, your CV summary might look something like this: To make your summary memorable, make sure you mention how your previous experience will be beneficial to the current you’re applying for. You should also include the following information: What can you do for them? How can you help? How will your previous experience help fit in the company’s current environment? How can you help them grow while maintaining personal goals? Now, how to write a CV objective? Just like your CV summary, your objective should be 2-3 sentences at most. But instead of describing your work experience, it should focus more on your motivation for applying for the specific job. If, for example, you’re a recent college graduate with not a lot of experience under your belt, you might want to opt-in for the CV objective instead. This will explain your motivations as well as what you hope to gain from the position. To create a killer CV objective, you might want to include: Skills, education, and certificate relevant to the job title. Type of