This website uses cookies to ensure you get the best experience on our website. Learn more Got it! Skip to content Skip to main menu myfuture Sign upLog in Students (Show menu) Teachers and career practitioners (Show menu) Parents and carers (Show menu) Industry (Show menu) My favourites 0 Search career articles search Search Don't know what to read next? View suggested career articles or explore all articles on these topics: Gaining and keeping work Share via: emailprint 11 places to search for jobs Date modified: October 3, 2023 Reading time: 5 min read There are many places to look for a job. New services are always being set up to compete with established players. You can search online, in newspapers, through specialist agencies, at job seeker centres or through networks. Don't limit your search to one source. Here are 11 places you can search for a job. 1. Job websites Job websites are the most popular way to search for jobs. They feature jobs advertised by employers and employment agencies. You can search jobs by keywords, occupation, location, employment type (eg full time or contract) and salary rate. Some websites, such as Seek This link will open in a new window , Adzuna and Ethical jobs, advertise jobs in all industries, while some specialise in just one industry. You can save your job search and get sent an email when jobs come up that match your interests and preferences. On some sites, you can create a profile and upload your resume. Employers can contact you if they have a job that suits you. 2. Company and organisation websites Companies, organisations and government departments often advertise vacancies and graduate programs on their websites. Check for a 'careers' or 'about us' section on the homepage. They also advertise through their social media accounts (Twitter, Facebook and LinkedIn). You can follow and subscribe to company social media feeds to keep updated about job opportunities. The APS Jobs website lists Australian Public Service vacancies around Australia and overseas. State governments advertise vacancies on their careers websites. 3. LinkedIn LinkedIn has emerged as an important platform for finding job vacancies. Companies, organisations and government departments all advertise jobs on LinkedIn. If you create a career profile, LinkedIn will use information from your profile to show you jobs you may be interested in. You can also save jobs and searches, to find out when new results match your criteria. Consider your LinkedIn profile to be your online resume and make sure you clean up your digital footprint. Look for online resources with tips for developing an impressive LinkedIn profile. 4. Labour hire and employment agencies There are some jobs you can only find out about through employment agencies. Agencies regularly contact employers to ask about job openings. Employers often place vacancies directly with these agencies. Different agencies offer different services. Some agencies focus on one area, others on several related areas. Some specialise in entry-level positions, others in executive searches. Labour hire and temp agencies match workers to available jobs. In this arrangement, the agency becomes your employer, assigning you to different jobs. Some employers use labour hire and temp agencies to trial workers before offering permanent employment. Make sure you know what type of agency you're approaching. Some agencies offer training to upgrade your skills and make you more employable. Be wary of overly expensive training and guarantees of employment that sound too good to be true (they probably are). To get a job through an agency, you register with that agency. Usually this means completing a registration or application form. It might involve a skills test for jobs such as computing or administration. You may also be asked to show proof of your qualifications. 5. Networking Networking is an important way to find out about suitable positions. Develop a strategy to get yourself known by those most likely to connect you to suitable positions. There are many formal networking events (often organised by professional associations, see below). You can also use local and personal networks formed through community involvement, volunteering, sport or hobbies. Let people know what your plans are and what position you are now looking for. Information interviewing can be an excellent networking technique. 6. Professional and trade associations Professional and trade association websites may have job advertisements. They may also run in-depth articles about industry trends. You could subscribe to industry journals (at a cost) if they regularly advertise jobs you're interested in. Otherwise, you might find them at local, university or TAFE libraries. Professional associations often offer training and host events where you can network. Australian professional associations include Certified Practising Accountants (CPA), Master Builders Australia, and Restaurant & Catering Industry Association*. You could use Google to search for professional associations related to your career interests in your state. *View the profiles in Industries for lists and links to industry associations. 7. Events Events such as career expos also offer job search opportunities. Industries promote themselves as career options and employers give out information about working with their companies and their current vacancies. Sometimes you can apply for a position right there. Take a few copies of your resume with you and be prepared for an on-the-spot interview. Try a Google search for career expos in your state. 8. Centrelink When you register with Centrelink, they will send you information about searching for jobs. They will provide links to services or programs you might be eligible for such as Workforce Australia. 9. Group Training Organisations Group Training Organisations (GTOs) employ apprentices and trainees and place them with 'host employers'. As an apprentice or trainee with a GTO, you're sure of continuous work and training. To find a GTO go to the Group Training Directory. 10. Newspapers Check local papers for local jobs. Articles in the career, employment and business sections will tell you about new trends, businesses or projects. 11. Noticeboards Noticeboards can be a source for local jobs, often on a casual or part-time basis. Keep an eye out for job vacancy notices in places like: shop windows shop counters community noticeboards (in supermarkets, libraries and shopping centres) outside factory gates. About the author myfuture myfuture is Australia's National Career Information Service and supports people to make career decisions, plan their career pathway and manage work transitions. Contact us or say hello on Facebook or Twitter. Tags: Gaining and keeping work Share via: emailprint Suggested career articles How to find work overseas Many Australians are working overseas. Find out how to join them. The world of work Gaining and keeping work Responding to job advertisements Job advertisements need you to provide the right mix of well formatted documents for a successful job application. Gaining and keeping work Super-charge your job search activities Tackle the 'hidden job market' and dramatically increase your chance of landing your next role. Gaining and keeping work How to plan your transition back to work Planning your return will help you understand your options and increase your confidence about making a good decision. Gaining and keeping work Skills to succeed Back to top Log in from: Australian Capital Territory New South Wales Northern Territory Queensland South Australia Tasmania Victoria Western Australia Somewhere else... Don't have an account? Learn about yourself My career profile Career bullseyes Explore opportunities Occupations Courses Industries Apply your knowledge Career stories Career articles Job seeker resources User guide videos Assisting others As a teacher or career practitioner As a parent or carer Support Help centre Contact us Glossary Terms of use Privacy policy Accessibility About myfuture Facebook Instagram LinkedIn Twitter Youtube myfuture acknowledges the Eastern Kulin Nation, Traditional Custodians of the land on which our head office stands and pays our respects to Elders past and present. We recognise the Traditional Custodians of Country across Australia and their continuing connection and contribution to lands, waters, communities and learning. myfuture has successfully qualified to be part of the Safer Technologies 4 Schools Product Badge Program in 2023. © 2024 Education Services Australia Ltd. Version 2.0.137 | Date: 20/03/2024 | Build: 137