Page navigation Post a job Jobs and work experience Postgraduate study Careers advice Applying for university Log in Register Site search Interview tips How to prepare for an interview Rachel Swain, Editorial manager May, 2023 View all graduate jobs On this page Types of interview Interview research Practice job interviews What to take What to wear to an interview 4 ways to make a good impression After the interview In order to put in a good performance and secure the job you need to make sure you're prepared. Take a look at these tips to get you interview ready Types of interview There are different types of job interview. In some cases, you'll only need to succeed at one of these to land the role. In others, particularly at large graduate employers, you may face several interview formats throughout the application process. Face-to face - the traditional and still most common form of interview. You'll attend the employer's office and be questioned on your suitability for the job by an individual or panel. Face-to-face interviews usually last between 45 minutes and two hours, and may be preceded or followed by tests and exercises. Questions may be strength-based or competency-based. Telephone - often used by employers early in the application process to filter large numbers of applicants. If you're successful, you'll typically be invited to a face-to-face interview or assessment centre. Expect a telephone interview to last around half an hour. Video - increasingly popular among large employers, particularly for applications to graduate schemes. Video interviews can be live or pre-recorded and tend to last around half an hour. Assessment centres - lasting a full day they enable employers to compare the performance of lots of candidates at the same time. You'll attend an assessment centre with other applicants and take part in tasks such as presentations, team exercises and psychometric tests. Interview research Your performance in an interview depends, to a significant extent, on how well you prepare. Don't leave this until the last minute. In the days leading up to the interview, focus your research on the: Employer - you need to show that you understand the business beyond the basics. What sector does it operate in? What challenges does it face? Who are its competitors? What major projects has it recently completed? What are its culture and values? This kind of knowledge demonstrates a genuine interest. Role - read the job description again and, if you completed an application form, go over it to refresh your memory of how your skills and qualifications match the job. It's vital that you can explain why you want the job, that you understand the role and, even more importantly, why the employer should choose you over other candidates. Interview panel - try to find out who will be interviewing you. The email inviting you to the interview may include this information. Use LinkedIn and the 'About us' section of the company website to find out more about their professional interests and experience. This may help you to connect with your interviewers and create a positive impression during the interview. Questions - consider how you'll answer common interview questions, as well as preparing some questions you'd like to ask the interviewer. There are also some practical things to plan. When and where is the interview taking place? Have you planned your journey and checked the timetables for any public transport you need to take? Does all your equipment work for video and telephone interviews? Getting a good nights sleep and having a healthy breakfast on the morning of your interview will stand you in good stead. If your interview is scheduled after lunchtime, make sure you eat something even if you're feeling nervous - you won't put in your best performance on an empty stomach. Practice job interviews It's a good idea to do at least one mock interview before the real thing. Your university careers and employability service will help you to practice your interview technique. You can also write and practise answers to common interview questions with someone you trust - possibly even recording yourself and then reviewing your performance. It's also worth testing your telephone connection and making sure that your laptop, microphone and any other technical equipment you need is working, and you know how to use them. What to take pen and notebook your CV and interview invitation your academic certificates and work examples if requested photo ID breath mints or gum a bottle of water money for transport and food. In addition, for online interviews you may also need: laptop/computer headset/earphones microphone log in for the software you need to use. What to wear to an interview While many employers expect candidates to dress smartly, a growing number encourage casual wear at work, making it trickier than ever to choose an interview outfit. What you'll be expected to wear depends on factors such as the size of the company, the industry it operates in and the culture it promotes. For example, a small creative agency may have different standards to a major accountancy firm. If you're unsure on the dress code, ask before attending the interview. The key point to remember is that it's better to be too smart than too casual. Only opt for a more casual outfit if you're certain that's acceptable - if there's any doubt, go for smart business attire. Whatever you choose, make sure that your clothes are ironed and your shoes are clean. For telephone and online interviews make sure you dress as though the interview is in person. Sitting in your tracksuit bottoms trying to act professional probably isn’t going to go too well. 4 ways to make a good impression As you're preparing for the interview, think about ways you can show yourself in a positive light: Punctuality - arriving late will increase your stress levels and give the employer a bad first impression, so do your best to arrive in good time. Positivity and enthusiasm - be polite and professional with any staff you meet before or after the interview and, if you're feeling particularly nervous, remind yourself that the worst thing that could happen is not getting the job. During the interview, respond to questions with positive statements, be enthusiastic about the job and avoid badmouthing your previous employers or university tutors. Body language - give a firm handshake to your interviewer(s) before and after the session. Once you're seated, sit naturally without slouching in your chair or leaning on the desk. Throughout the interview, remember to smile frequently and maintain eye contact. Clarity - answer all questions clearly and concisely, evidencing your most relevant skills, experiences and achievements. It's acceptable to pause before answering a difficult question to give yourself thinking time, or asking for clarification if you're unsure what a question means. When answering, don't speak too quickly. After the interview As your job interview comes to an end, make sure you find out when you'll be informed of the outcome - and thank the interviewer for giving you the chance to attend. Make some notes about the questions that were asked and how you answered them while the interview is still fresh in your memory. This will help you prepare even better for future interviews. There are three potential outcomes: Success - if you're offered the job, make sure it's right for you by discussing it with friends and family, and double-check details such as the salary before deciding whether to accept. Rejection - if you're unsuccessful, don't be too downhearted as graduate employers receive large numbers of applications for every role. Email the company to thank them for the opportunity and request feedback from your interview so that you can improve your performance next time. Further steps - interviews are typically the final stage in the application process, but if the employer has not been able to make a decision you may be asked back for a second interview. Written by Rachel Swain, Editorial manager Prospects · May 2023 Also in this section… How to prepare for an interview Interview questions 7 good questions to ask at an interview Competency-based interviews Strength-based interviews Psychometric tests Interview tests and exercises Assessment centres Telephone interviews Video interview tips Top 5 job interview mistakes How to approach a second interview Preparing for SHL tests Practice aptitude tests from JobTestPrep How to pass numerical reasoning tests Watson Glaser Critical Thinking Test Get ready for the University Clinical Aptitude Test How would you rate this page? On a scale where 1 is dislike and 5 is like Dislike 1 unhappy-very 2 unhappy 3 neutral 4 happy Like 5 happy-very You may also like… Back to top Get in touch Contact us Prospects on Instagram Prospects on Facebook Prospects on Twitter Prospects on Linkedin Prospects on Youtube Prospects' Future You podcast Promote job vacancies, courses or events Employer advertising Prices from £370 University packages COMPANY About us Work for us Our publications Press office LEGAL Privacy Cookies Terms of use Accessibility MADE WITH LOVE IN MANCHESTER PROSPECTS IS PART OF JISC Company information Registered office 4 Portwall Lane, Bristol, BS1 6NB. Registered number 02881024 (England) © Copyright 2024 Jisc. All rights reserved.