Jobs Courses Businesses for sale Volunteering Job search Profile Career advice Company reviews Sign in Employer site Search Explore careers Explore salaries Job hunting Working life Job hunting / Applying for jobs How to find a job SEEK content team – updated on 16 May, 2023 Share So you think you've got your job search technique down pat? Think again. What’s seemingly a simple process can actually be approached from hundreds of angles. We’ve got some tips to help you land your next great job. Write a career plan. You’re more likely to find the perfect job if you’re clear on the direction you want to take your career in. Sit down and write up a plan that encapsulates who you professionally are, must-have job attributes such as career progression and working hours, and what organisations you’d like to work for. Keep your plan handy when applying for jobs to see how closely aligned they are. You might find that they’re realistically not even worth applying for! Refresh your resume. It’s easy to merely update your resume with an extra few lines each time you change jobs, but if you really want to find a job that’s as far away as possible to your weekend shift work during high school, it’s time to give your resume a makeover. It not only needs to look more professional and sophisticated than the earlier days of your career, it needs to provide a snapshot of the best roles and experiences you’ve had into a concise one to two page document. Don’t be precious with it – make it reflect who you have professionally become today! Maximise your online search. People find jobs online today more than anywhere else. With SEEK being the most popular job site in Australia and New Zealand and so many people using it, how do you get the best out of it? Set up SEEK JobMail alerts so that you’re the first to know when new jobs in your industry are posted and make sure you’ve filled out your SEEK profile so potential employers can see your skills, experience and what you're looking for in your next role. The more you add to your SEEK profile, the easier it is for the right employers to find you. Register with recruiters. If you need further help finding jobs, it’s often worth getting in touch with recruiters who specialise in your industry of interest. Most recruiters have a registration process which usually entails an interview, presenting your resume and/or portfolio of work and filling out your details for their database. While this can sometimes seem a little mechanical, it’s in recruiters’ best interest to place their candidates in roles they’ve been assigned, so don’t hold back on registering! Connect with your networks. Many people assume to network you need to attend special industry events, and meet and engage with new people. While this can often be the case, networking can also be as easy as getting the word out to your existing networks – friends, family, past employers and colleagues, and contacts on online professional networks – to let them know you’re in the market for a new career opportunity. Prepare and practice. The process of applying and interviewing for jobs requires a lot of preparation and practice. Make sure you follow up every sent resume with a phone call or email requesting a job interview. Once you’ve secured an interview, find out more about the industry, role and company and make a checklist of all the reasons you’d be great for the position. Ask a friend or family member to perform a mock interview with you. Get them to ask you tough questions and keep repeating your answers until you know them off by heart. That way, when it comes to the actual interview, you’ll have the confidence you need to go the next step. The more you add to your SEEK profile, the easier it is for the right employers to find you. More from this category: Applying for jobs Browse top search terms Did you know many candidates preparing a resume also research their industry by exploring top search terms? Select an industry to uncover the top search terms Select an industry All industries Accounting Administration & Office Support Advertising, Arts & Media Banking & Financial Services Call Centre & Customer Service Community Services & Development Construction Consulting & Strategy Design & Architecture Education & Training Engineering Farming, Animals & Conservation Government & Defence Healthcare & Medical Hospitality & Tourism Human Resources & Recruitment Information & Communication Technology Insurance & Superannuation Legal Manufacturing, Transport & Logistics Marketing & Communications Mining, Resources & Energy Real Estate & Property Retail & Consumer Products Sales Science & Technology Sport & Recreation Trades & Services 1. casual 2. retail 3. no experience 4. work from home 5. administration 6. registered nurse 7. part time 8. fifo 9. chef 10. truck driver 11. receptionist 12. electrician 13. disability support worker 14. labourer 15. customer service 16. warehouse 17. manager 18. project manager 19. hospitality 20. entry level SEEK data, October 2023 – April 2024. Popular on SEEK Ready for a pay rise? These in-demand jobs are paying more 3 mins Industries where the jobs are right now 3 min read A guide to salaries in your industry 3 min read Free resume template Template Explore related topics Choose an area of interest to browse related careers. Finding the job for you Applying for jobs Resumes Cover letters Job interviews First job Returning to work SEEK Profile Job hunting Subscribe to Career Advice Get expert career advice delivered to your inbox. First name Last name Email Subscribe You can cancel emails at any time. By clicking ‘subscribe’ you agree to SEEK’s Privacy Statement. Hi there, Want to explore jobs picked just for you? Explore jobs Job seekers Job search Profile Recommended jobs Saved searches Saved jobs Applied jobs Career advice Explore careers Explore salaries Company reviews Download apps SEEK sites Employers Register for free Post a job ad Products & prices Customer service Hiring advice Market insights Recruitment software partners About SEEK About SEEK Newsroom Investors Work for SEEK International partners Partner services Contact Help centre Contact us Product & tech blog SEEK videos Social Australia Terms & conditions Security & Privacy © SEEK. All rights reserved