About Admission & Financial Aid Academics Campus Life Career Resources Athletics Support SSU Career Resources / Career Services for Students & Alumni / Resumes, Cover Letters, and Interviewing / Preparing for an Interview Preparing for an Interview Contests Dress for Success Etiquette Events and Workshops Explore Majors Flip the Script Follow Us on Social Media For Employers Graduate School Graduation Survey Handshake Internship Opportunities Job Search Meet Our Staff Professional Headshots Resumes, Cover Letters, and Interviewing Students and Alumni with Disabilities Veterans Visit Us Preparing for the job interview can be one of the most stressful parts of the job search. Luckily, there are a number of tools and techniques to make this task easier. The key to any interview is being well prepared. It is important to write down, in advance, the answer to questions you are likely to be asked. This will help you focus your thoughts. Review our Interview Success Packet! (PDF) Before the Interview: Dress to Impress Want tips on how to look professional for your interview? Learn more. Before the Interview: Research the Company It might be important to first determine if you are a good fit for the position and company. Review the required skills and expectations carefully. The interviewer will expect that you have taken the time to read about their company. Most likely, you will be asked questions relating to the company and its culture. BE PREPARED! Be familiar with the corporate web page. Your knowledge of the company will come in handy during the interview. Research and compose a list of questions about the company’s services, products, and philosophies. *Examples: What is unique about them? Who are their competitors? Who are the key people? What is the structure? What are the target markets? What is their mission and goals? Etc. Write down several reasons you would like to work for that company. Before the Interview: Practice and Prepare! Review the steps below and schedule a mock-interview with Career Services (Make an Appointment). The interview atmosphere should be POSITIVE. Learn to articulate your strengths and weaknesses and emphasize the positive contributions you can make. Prepare for Questions The questions below are divided into two categories, traditional and behavior-based. You will recognize the difference between the two types of questions immediately. You will need to be prepared for both types of interview questions. The Student Career Development Office and the Library have several books and handouts containing additional interview questions. Examples of Traditional Questions Examples of Behavioral Questions Be prepared to articulate your quantifiable strengths as determined by such things as skill, experience, and education. List specific examples and be able to tell brief stories. Read and edit your cover letter and résumé. Be able to back them up. Bring multiple copies to distribute if needed during the interview. Check your schedule to be sure you have nothing important planned in the next few weeks. You do not want an employer to reconsider a position because you have a vacation planned. DO NOT arrive late! It is not acceptable to be late for an interview. Arrive early by accounting for traffic, weather, construction, loss in direction, etc. Arrive with a smile on your face, good posture, and a firm handshake. TURN OFF YOUR PHONE AND PUT IT AWAY. Even the “vibrate” setting can cause distractions. Be kind and polite to EVERYONE you come in contact with. Employers could ask secretaries or other employees if certain applicants made a positive or negative impression on them. During the Interview: What Makes You Stand Out? Give the interviewer a firm handshake Make good eye contact with the interviewer Body Language: Try not to fidget or touch your face or hair too often Keep an upright posture Be confident and energetic Highlight your personality and sense of humor. Employers want to see if you will fit well with the company’s culture and team. Be honest and listen carefully. Be attentive to the question being asked so that you answer the question to the best of your ability. Stay focused on the issue at hand rather than on issues that may arise later in the interview. Believe it or not, it is alright to admit you are nervous. Some interviewer may find this to be a relatable quality During the Interview: Prepare for Questions ALWAYS ask questions at the end of an interview, it is expected. Prepare several questions as some will be answered during the natural course of the interview. You should be able to ask 2-3 questions that were not answered during the interview and could not be found online. Examples of Questions to ask Examples of Questions to Avoid: Never ask about pay, time off, benefits, etc. You can usually inquire about this information after a job offer has been made. Never ask many questions about the interviewer's background Never ask how quickly you can be promoted Never ask about gossip you've heard Never ask for information you could have easily found with a quick search After the interview: What to Do Thank you Notes: It is important that you send an electronic (email) thank you note the same day of the interview to the person(s) with whom you interviewed. A handwritten thank you note using high-quality paper should also be sent within 24 -48 hours after the interview. Most interviewees only send an electronic thank you note. Writing a hand-written thank you will help you to stand out. Thank you notes should be brief and concise. See an example note. Follow-up: Allow a few weeks for the hiring process to unfold then give the hiring manager a nice nudge to keep yourself and your capabilities active in their considerations by leaving a professional voicemail Be sure to leave the following information in your voicemail: A graceful exit A pleasant reiteration of your interest An upbeat message Reminder that you recently interviewed and /or previously interacted Phone number(2x- slowly-beginning of the message and end) Name (2x- Beginning of the message and the end) Video Interviews: Make sure you are comfortable using the software before the interview If you do not have a professional username, create a new one Dress professionally, use good body language and smile Set up your computer in a quiet space with a clean, professional background (i.e. clear wall) Have an outline of the points you want to make and your resume in front of you for reminders Keep a glass of water near you Phone Interviews: Arrange a quiet space without visual distractions Make sure you have your resume, writing utensil, and blank paper for notes in front of you Jot down the interviewer(s) name(s) down at the beginning Ensure you have a good connection, it is best to use a landline Additional Resources: OhioMeansJobs offers assistance to prepare for all kinds of interviews. They utilize Big Interview, which is an online system that combines training and practice to help you improve your interview technique and build your confidence through: Challenging virtual mock interviews for all experience levels and dozens of industries A database of thousands of interview questions with tips on how to answer them The ability to rate and share your interview answers for feedback Comprehensive video training curriculum covering all aspects of landing a job Step-by-step interview Answer Builder for crafting answers to behavioral questions Career Services can review and discuss your progress through Big Interview upon request! 940 Second Street Portsmouth Ohio 45662 Main: (740) 351-3205 Admission: (740) 351-4778 Quick Links Directory Offices A-Z Announcements Accessibility Report an Accessibility Issue Campus Map + Directions Report a Complaint MySSU IT Service Desk Website Updates Make a gift Our Mission We Prepare Today’s Students to Succeed in Tomorrow’s World. © 2023 Shawnee State University All Rights Reserved Privacy and Terms of Use Student Consumer Complaint Process Accessibility Parents Current Students Faculty and Staff Alumni My SSU Login Request Info Schedule a Visit Apply