INVESTING SIMULATOR BANKING PERSONAL FINANCE NEWS REVIEWS ACADEMY LIVE Table of Contents Networking Referrals Job Boards and Career Websites Job Fairs Company Websites Cold Calling Head Hunters and Recruiters Temping or Internships Creative or Outlandish Tactics FAQs The Bottom Line CAREERS CAREER ADVICE 9 Ways to Find a New Job By JANET FOWLER Updated December 12, 2023 Reviewed by EBONY HOWARD Fact checked by KIRSTEN ROHRS SCHMITT You can use several strategies to get a new job to keep your career moving forward and to earn more money. Some of the best ways to look for a new job include networking online and in person and monitoring job site frequently. Learn more about other tips to help you find a new job. KEY TAKEAWAYS Networking, online and in person, can help you stay on top of what's happening in your field, including what jobs are open. Check in on job search sites frequently. Look for jobs that are in your specific field to take advantage of your skills set. Don't snub temporary or freelance work, which can often lead to full-time opportunities. 1. Networking Many of the best jobs are never advertised in what's essentially a hidden job market. These jobs are filled by candidates who learn of them by word of mouth from friends, former colleagues, and ex-bosses. By networking, or socializing, you can improve your chances of finding an unadvertised job. Consider joining professional associations, attending alumni events, and connecting with professionals who work in your field. Take every chance you get to meet up, in person or online, with others in your field. Online networking sites like LinkedIn allow you to broaden your network to include friends of friends. The bigger your network, the more likely you'll find out about new opportunities. 1 2. Referrals Some employers offer incentives to their employees for referring a successful candidate to the company. It's a win-win situation for everyone. You get a new job, and your contact gets a finder's fee for attracting a top-notch employee. That's relatively rare, but there's nothing stopping you from asking a valued friend who works in your field to let you know about any openings. The working relationships you create at every job may open other doors years in the future. 3. Job Boards and Career Websites Online job boards in which companies post job openings are a great way to find a position that matches your criteria. Anyone can access federal and state governments job boards and job banks. 2 3 4 You can also use job search engines or any of a vast number of career-related websites that post job openings, such as Monster.com, Google for Jobs, CareerBuilder, and Indeed. Many other databases specialize in freelance and contract work, including People Per Hour, Upwork, Simply Hired, and Crowded. Many industries have specialized job search sites for particular fields, like Dice for tech professionals and ArtsThread for artists. These websites function in a similar way to traditional want-ads, but they have a greater reach and a faster turnaround time. 4. Job Fairs Job fairs are often targeted toward specific industries, although some job or recruitment fairs are more generalized. The promotional material will include a list of the organizations that will be represented. Investigate any companies that interest you, bring a resumes and business cards, and get ready to sell yourself. Consider any conversations with recruiters as mini-interviews that can set you apart from other applicants. Some organizations may even offer on-site interviews to candidates that match their requirements. 5. Company Websites If you know which employer you want to work for, you can go directly to the career section of its website. If you routinely search openings on its site, you could find an opportunity that matches your skills set. Create a list of employers that you'd like to work for and visit their websites often. If you're set on working for a specific company, it may take some time to find the right opening, but it can be a great way to find your dream job. 6. Cold Calling If you don't see any job listings posted for a company you're interested in, you might consider making a cold call. Phone or email people in the organization after finding their contact details on the company website. Ask about upcoming vacancies, and attach a copy of your resume. Keep in mind that this kind of contact may not always be well-received. You'll be lucky to get any response at all. But there is always a chance it'll give you the inside track on upcoming vacancies. 7. Headhunters and Recruiters If you're looking for some professional help in your job search, headhunters and recruitment agencies can help. Many organizations hire through recruitment agencies to streamline the hiring process. Head hunters actively recruit individuals to fill specific vacancies. Payment is based on commission. Make sure you know up front whether you or the company is paying it. Keep in mind that many high schools and colleges have job placement services that can help new graduates to develop their resumes and assist both current students and alumni with job searches. 8. Temping or Internships Temporary employment and short-term contracts often lead to permanent positions. It's a great way to get a foot in the door or gain useful business contacts. Many recruitment agencies can assist with locating temporary or casual positions and contract work. Internships are often a good opportunity for students who are just graduating from college. The job placement services of many schools connect their students with opportunities. If you're just starting out and you can afford it, volunteering can be a great way to gain valuable industry contacts. 9. Creative or Outlandish Tactics In a competitive job market, some job seekers have pulled out all the stops. Billboards, chain letters with a copy of your resume attached, or even pasting your resume to yourself and walking around the city as a human billboard are just some of the methods job-seekers have used to get noticed. These methods may actually work, but be cautious. Be sure that your creative tactic is appropriate for the industry you're trying to break into. How Do You Know When It's Time to Get a New Job? There are several reasons why you may want to get a new job. If you have been in the same position with the same salary for several years, you may want to consider a new job to advance your career. If the company you work for seems financially unsound (if they have recently implement layoffs), you may want a new job for more security. If you don't feel comfortable in your workplace, such as if you are getting bullied, it may also be time to get a new job. How Do You Actually Quit a Job? To leave your job, you should remain professional and respectful of your employer. Try to give at least two weeks notice. Put your resignation in writing and maintain a professional tone. Accept your employer's reaction and then continue to do your best in your position until you leave the company. What Should I Do Before Starting a New Job? If you've been newly hired, there are a few things you can do before starting your new job. First, you can familiarize yourself with the employee handbook. You can research your colleagues on LinkedIn to help you connect with them once you start working. And you can try to learn any software your new company uses. The Bottom Line Finding a new job that fits your criteria and skills set can take time, but you have several avenues to explore to find the right match, from job boards to networking. If you are transitioning to a new job, remember to leave your current workplace respectfully and try to give them notice of at least two weeks in advance. ARTICLE SOURCES Related Articles 3 Tips for Finding a Job in Private Equity Best Websites to Find a Job in Finance Job Hunting in 2024 Who You Know, Not What You Know Might Matter More Choosing a Profession in the Finance Industry 4 Things You Should Never Reveal During a Job Interview Partner Links Related Terms What Is a Headhunter? What They Do and How They're Paid Headhunters are hired by firms to locate individuals who meet specific job requirements. They may also be referred to as executive recruiters. more Gemology: Identifying and Valuing Gemstones for Investors Gemology is the scientific study and identification of gemstones; investing in which can be risky for nonprofessionals. more What Is a Cover Letter? Types and How To Write One A cover letter is submitted with a job application and resume explaining the applicant's credentials and interest in the open position. more How to Use Interpersonal Skills to Get and Keep a Job Interpersonal skills are the behaviors and tactics people use to interact with others effectively. Some people are born with them but they can be learned. more Aptitude Test: Definition, How It's Used, Types, and How to Pass An aptitude test is an exam or survey used to determine an individual's propensity to succeed in a given activity. more Technical Skills You Should List on Your Resume Technical skills are the abilities and knowledge needed to complete practical tasks. Learn which technical skills employers are looking for, how to improve yours, and how to list them on your resume. more About Us Terms of Service Dictionary Editorial Policy Advertise News Privacy Policy Contact Us Careers EU Privacy # A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Investopedia is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family. Please review our updated Terms of Service.