It’s a wonderful world — and universe — out there. Come explore with us! SUBSCRIBE / RENEW NOW SCIENCE NEWS MENU ABOUT US EDUCATION RESOURCES DONATE ALL TOPICS LIFE HUMANS EARTH SPACE TECH PLANTS Explainer: How photosynthesis works Plants make sugar and oxygen with the power of water, carbon dioxide and sunlight Green plants take in light from the sun and turn water and carbon dioxide into the oxygen we breathe and the sugars we eat. JEJA/E+/GETTY IMAGES By Bethany Brookshire October 28, 2020 at 6:30 am Take a deep breath. Then thank a plant. If you eat fruit, vegetables, grains or potatoes, thank a plant too. Plants and algae provide us with the oxygen we need to survive, as well as the carbohydrates we use for energy. They do it all through photosynthesis. Photosynthesis is the process of creating sugar and oxygen from carbon dioxide, water and sunlight. It happens through a long series of chemical reactions. But it can be summarized like this: Carbon dioxide, water and light go in. Glucose, water and oxygen come out. (Glucose is a simple sugar.) Photosynthesis can be split into two processes. The “photo” part refers to reactions triggered by light. “Synthesis” — the making of the sugar — is a separate process called the Calvin cycle. Both processes happen inside a chloroplast. This is a specialized structure, or organelle, in a plant cell. The structure contains stacks of membranes called thylakoid membranes. That’s where the light reaction begins. Chloroplasts are found in plant cells. This is where photosynthesis takes place. The chlorophyll molecules that take in energy from sunlight are located in the stacks called thylakoid membranes. BLUERINGMEDIA/ISTOCK/GETTY IMAGES PLUS Let the light shine in When light hits a plant’s leaves, it shines on chloroplasts and into their thylakoid membranes. Those membranes are filled with chlorophyll, a green pigment. This pigment absorbs light energy. Light travels as electromagnetic waves. The wavelength — distance between waves — determines energy level. Some of those wavelengths are visible to us as the colors we see. If a molecule, such as chlorophyll, has the right shape, it can absorb the energy from some wavelengths of light. Chlorophyll can absorb light we see as blue and red. That’s why we see plants as green. Green is the wavelength plants reflect, not the color they absorb. While light travels as a wave, it also can be a particle called a photon. Photons have no mass. They do, however, have a small amount of light energy. When a photon of light from the sun bounces into a leaf, its energy excites a chlorophyll molecule. That photon starts a process that splits a molecule of water. The oxygen atom that splits off from the water instantly bonds with another, creating a molecule of oxygen, or O2. The chemical reaction also produces a molecule called ATP and another molecule called NADPH. Both of these allow a cell to store energy. The ATP and NADPH also will take part in the synthesis part of photosynthesis. Notice that the light reaction makes no sugar. Instead, it supplies energy — stored in the ATP and NADPH — that gets plugged into the Calvin cycle. This is where sugar is made. But the light reaction does produce something we use: oxygen. All the oxygen we breathe is the result of this step in photosynthesis, carried out by plants and algae (which are not plants) the world over. Give me some sugar The next step takes the energy from the light reaction and applies it to a process called the Calvin cycle. The cycle is named for Melvin Calvin, the man who discovered it. The Calvin cycle is sometimes also called the dark reaction because none of its steps require light. But it still happens during the day. That’s because it needs the energy produced by the light reaction that comes before it. While the light reaction takes place in the thylakoid membranes, the ATP and NADPH it produces end up in the stroma. This is the space inside the chloroplast but outside the thylakoid membranes. The Calvin cycle has four major steps: carbon fixation: Here, the plant brings in CO2 and attaches it to another carbon molecule, using rubisco. This is an enzyme, or chemical that makes reactions move faster. This step is so important that rubisco is the most common protein in a chloroplast — and on Earth. Rubisco attaches the carbon in CO2 to a five-carbon molecule called ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate (or RuBP). This creates a six-carbon molecule, which immediately splits into two chemicals, each with three carbons. reduction: The ATP and NADPH from the light reaction pop in and transform the two three-carbon molecules into two small sugar molecules. The sugar molecules are called G3P. That’s short for glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (GLIH- sur-AAL-duh-hide 3-FOS-fayt). carbohydrate formation: Some of that G3P leaves the cycle to be converted into bigger sugars such as glucose (C6H12O6). regeneration: With more ATP from the continuing light reaction, leftover G3P picks up two more carbons to become RuBP. This RuBP pairs up with rubisco again. They are now ready to start the Calvin cycle again when the next molecule of CO2 arrives. At the end of photosynthesis, a plant ends up with glucose (C6H12O6), oxygen (O2) and water (H2O). The glucose molecule goes on to bigger things. It can become part of a long-chain molecule, such as cellulose; that’s the chemical that makes up cell walls. Plants also can store the energy packed in a glucose molecule within larger starch molecules. They can even put the glucose into other sugars — such as fructose — to make a plant’s fruit sweet. All of these molecules are carbohydrates — chemicals containing carbon, oxygen and hydrogen. (CarbOHydrate makes it easy to remember.) The plant uses the bonds in these chemicals to store energy. But we use the these chemicals too. Carbohydrates are an important part of the foods we eat, particularly grains, potatoes, fruits and vegetables. We eat plants for food. But plants make their own food. This video explains how. Power Words More About Power Words algae: Single-celled organisms, once considered plants (they aren’t). As aquatic organisms, they grow in water. Like green plants, they depend on sunlight to make their food. atom: The basic unit of a chemical element. Atoms are made up of a dense nucleus that contains positively charged protons and uncharged neutrons. The nucleus is orbited by a cloud of negatively charged electrons. ATP: Short for adenosine triphosphate. Cells make this molecule to power almost all of their activities. Cells use oxygen and simple sugars to create this molecule, the main source of their energy. The small structures in cells that carry out this energy-storing process are known as mitochondria. Like a battery, ATP stores a bit of usable energy. Once the cell uses it up, mitochondria must recharge the cell by making more ATP using energy harvested from the cell’s nutrients. bond: (in chemistry) A semi-permanent attachment between atoms — or groups of atoms — in a molecule. It’s formed by an attractive force between the participating atoms. Once bonded, the atoms will work as a unit. To separate the component atoms, energy must be supplied to the molecule as heat or some other type of radiation. Calvin cycle: Named for Melvin Calvin, the man who discovered it, this cycle is the process by which plants and algae turn carbon dioxide into basic carbohydrates. carbohydrates: Any of a large group of compounds occurring in foods and living tissues, including sugars, starch and cellulose. They contain hydrogen and oxygen in the same ratio as water (2:1) and typically can be broken down in an animal’s body to release energy. carbon dioxide: (or CO2) A colorless, odorless gas produced by all animals when the oxygen they inhale reacts with the carbon-rich foods that they’ve eaten. Carbon dioxide also is released when organic matter burns (including fossil fuels like oil or gas). Carbon dioxide acts as a greenhouse gas, trapping heat in Earth’s atmosphere. Plants convert carbon dioxide into oxygen during photosynthesis, the process they use to make their own food. cell: The smallest structural and functional unit of an organism. Typically too small to see with the unaided eye, it consists of a watery fluid surrounded by a membrane or wall. Depending on their size, animals are made of anywhere from thousands to trillions of cells. Most organisms, such as yeasts, molds, bacteria and some algae, are composed of only one cell. cellulose: A type of fiber found in plant cell walls. It is formed by chains of glucose molecules. chemical: A substance formed from two or more atoms that unite (bond) in a fixed proportion and structure. For example, water is a chemical made when two hydrogen atoms bond to one oxygen atom. Its chemical formula is H2O. Chemical also can be an adjective to describe properties of materials that are the result of various reactions between different compounds. chemical reaction: A process that involves the rearrangement of the molecules or structure of a substance, as opposed to a change in physical form (as from a solid to a gas). chlorophyll: Any of several green pigments found in plants that perform photosynthesis — creating sugars (foods) from carbon dioxide and water. chloroplast: A tiny structure in the cells of green algae and green plants that contain chlorophyll and creates glucose through photosynthesis. electromagnetic: An adjective referring to light radiation, to magnetism or to both. excite: (in chemistry and physics) To transfer energy to one or more outer electrons in an atom. They remain in this higher energy state until they shed the extra energy through the emission of some type of radiation, such as light. fructose: A simple sugar. Along with glucose, fructose makes up half of each molecule of sucrose (also known as table sugar). glucose: A simple sugar that is an important energy source in living organisms. As an energy source moving through the bloodstream, it is known as “blood sugar.” It is half of the molecule that makes up table sugar (also known as sucrose). glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate or G3P: A molecule created as part of the chemical steps that form simple carbohydrates. Two molecules of G3P are made in plants and algae as part of the Calvin cycle of photosynthesis. Animals and bacteria also create G3P as part of their own steps of making carbohydrate. hydrogen: The lightest element in the universe. As a gas, it is colorless, odorless and highly flammable. It’s an integral part of many fuels, fats and chemicals that make up living tissues. It’s made of a single proton (which serves as its nucleus) orbited by a single electron. mass: A number that shows how much an object resists speeding up and slowing down — basically a measure of how much matter that object is made from. membrane: A barrier which blocks the passage (or flow through) of some materials depending on their size or other features. Membranes are an integral part of filtration systems. Many serve that same function as the outer covering of cells or organs of a body. molecule: An electrically neutral group of atoms that represents the smallest possible amount of a chemical compound. Molecules can be made of single types of atoms or of different types. For example, the oxygen in the air is made of two oxygen atoms (O2), but water is made of two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom (H2O). NADPH or NADP+: Short for nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (but no one calls it that). This molecule is a way for cells to store and transfer energy. When the NADP+ molecule is transformed to NADPH, it contains energy, which it can then use to power other reactions in a cell. organelle: Specialized structures, such as mitochondria, found within a cell. oxygen: A gas that makes up about 21 percent of Earth's atmosphere. All animals and many microorganisms need oxygen to fuel their growth (and metabolism). particle: A minute amount of something. photon: A particle representing the smallest possible amount of light or other type of electromagnetic radiation. photosynthesis: (verb: photosynthesize) The process by which green plants and some other organisms use sunlight to produce foods from carbon dioxide and water. protein: A compound made from one or more long