This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted advertising purposes. You may change your settings at any time or accept the default settings. You may close this banner to continue with only essential cookies. Privacy Policy Storage Preferences Targeted Advertising Personalization Analytics Save Accept All Reject All Education Menu DONATE Saved by 7 educators ENCYCLOPEDIC ENTRY OPEN EDUCATIONAL RESOURCE Photosynthesis Photosynthesis is the process by which plants use sunlight, water, and carbon dioxide to create oxygen and energy in the form of sugar. GRADES 5 - 8 SUBJECTS Biology PHOTOGRAPH Green Tree Leaves The plant leaves are green because that color is the part of sunlight reflected by a pigment in the leaves called chlorophyll. PHOTOGRAPH COURTESY OF SHUTTERSTOCK PHOTOGRAPH PHOTOGRAPH ARTICLEVOCABULARY Learning materials INSTRUCTIONAL LINKS Photosynthesis (Google doc) Most life on Earth depends on photosynthesis.The process is carried out by plants, algae, and some types of bacteria, which capture energy from sunlight to produce oxygen (O2) and chemical energy stored in glucose (a sugar). Herbivores then obtain this energy by eating plants, and carnivores obtain it by eating herbivores. The process During photosynthesis, plants take in carbon dioxide (CO2) and water (H2O) from the air and soil. Within the plant cell, the water is oxidized, meaning it loses electrons, while the carbon dioxide is reduced, meaning it gains electrons. This transforms the water into oxygen and the carbon dioxide into glucose. The plant then releases the oxygen back into the air, and stores energy within the glucose molecules. Chlorophyll Inside the plant cell are small organelles called chloroplasts, which store the energy of sunlight. Within the thylakoid membranes of the chloroplast is a light-absorbing pigment called chlorophyll, which is responsible for giving the plant its green color. During photosynthesis, chlorophyll absorbs energy from blue- and red-light waves, and reflects green-light waves, making the plant appear green. Light-dependent Reactions vs. Light-independent Reactions While there are many steps behind the process of photosynthesis, it can be broken down into two major stages: light-dependent reactions and light-independent reactions. The light-dependent reaction takes place within the thylakoid membrane and requires a steady stream of sunlight, hence the name light-dependent reaction. The chlorophyll absorbs energy from the light waves, which is converted into chemical energy in the form of the molecules ATP and NADPH. The light-independent stage, also known as the Calvin cycle, takes place in the stroma, the space between the thylakoid membranes and the chloroplast membranes, and does not require light, hence the name light-independent reaction. During this stage, energy from the ATP and NADPH molecules is used to assemble carbohydrate molecules, like glucose, from carbon dioxide. C3 and C4 Photosynthesis Not all forms of photosynthesis are created equal, however. There are different types of photosynthesis, including C3 photosynthesis and C4 photosynthesis. C3 photosynthesis is used by the majority of plants. It involves producing a three-carbon compound called 3-phosphoglyceric acid during the Calvin Cycle, which goes on to become glucose. C4 photosynthesis, on the other hand, produces a four-carbon intermediate compound, which splits into carbon dioxide and a three-carbon compound during the Calvin Cycle. A benefit of C4 photosynthesis is that by producing higher levels of carbon, it allows plants to thrive in environments without much light or water. The National Geographic Society is making this content available under a Creative Commons CC-BY-NC-SA license. The License excludes the National Geographic Logo (meaning the words National Geographic + the Yellow Border Logo) and any images that are included as part of each content piece. For clarity the Logo and images may not be removed, altered, or changed in any way. Credits User Permissions RELATED RESOURCES ENCYCLOPEDIC ENTRY Chlorophyll Chlorophyll is a pigment that gives plants their green color, and it helps plants create their own food through photosynthesis. 73 ARTICLE Sweet Secret What does a plant leaf have to do with the solar energy panels on the White House? Find out how Melvin Calvin’s Nobel Prize–winning photosynthesis research is helping cool the planet, in this article from National Geographic Education. 68 ENCYCLOPEDIC ENTRY Producers Producers convert water, carbon dioxide, minerals, and sunlight into the organic molecules that are the foundation of all life on Earth. 88 COLLECTION Photosynthesis Plants are autotrophs, which means they produce their own food. They use the process of photosynthesis to transform water, sunlight, and carbon dioxide into oxygen, and simple sugars that the plant uses as fuel. These primary producers form the base of an ecosystem and fuel the next trophic levels. Without this process, life on Earth as we know it would not be possible. We depend on plants for oxygen production and food. 162 National Geographic Headquarters 1145 17th Street NW Washington, DC 20036 ABOUT National Geographic Society NatGeo.com News and Impact Contact Us EXPLORE Our Explorers Our Programs Education Nat Geo Live Storytellers Collective Traveling Exhibitions JOIN US Ways to Give Apply for a Grant Careers DONATE GET UPDATES CONNECT National Geographic Society is a 501 (c)(3) organization. © 1996 - 2024 National Geographic Society. All rights reserved. Privacy Notice|Sustainability Policy|Terms of Service|Code of Ethics