About The Kid Should See This The TKSST Gift Guide Sign-in Become a Member The Kid Should See This • Smart videos for curious minds of all ages SCIENCE TECH SPACE ANIMALS NATURE FOOD DIY MUSIC HISTORY ART ANIMATION MORE TOPICS The mathematical secrets of Pascal’s triangle Watch more with these video collections: fibonacci history how things work math numbers patterns shapes ted ed triangle It’s known as Pascal’s triangle in the Western world, but centuries before that, it was the Staircase of Mount Meru in India, the Khayyam Triangle in Iran, and Yang Hui’s Triangle in China. It can look complicated at first, but when you start to spend time with some of the incredible patterns hidden within this infinite mathematical work of art — diagonals, odds and evens, horizontal sums, exponents of 11, squares, the Fibonacci Sequence, and so much more — you may never look at a triangle in the same way again. Note: Before you watch the mathematical secrets of Pascal’s triangle, above, you may want to try this simplified worksheet (updated pdf) for a hands-on understanding of how some of the numbers, patterns, and secrets of Pascal’s triangle works. Update: Additional worksheets here. Another quick visual: Check out Jenny Eather’s Pascal’s triangle images below, one of many entries in her Maths Dictionary for Kids. Related reading: The Sierpinski Triangle. In the archives, watch more math, more shapes, and these site favorites: Mathematica – A World of Numbers… and Beyond, Vi Hart’s Hexaflexagon, Why do honeybees love hexagons? This Webby award-winning video collection exists to help teachers, librarians, and families spark kid wonder and curiosity. TKSST features smarter, more meaningful content than what's usually served up by YouTube's algorithms, and amplifies the creators who make that content. Curated, kid-friendly, independently-published. Support this mission by becoming a sustaining member today. This video was posted 8 years ago. Watch more videos about... fibonacci history how things work math numbers patterns shapes ted ed triangle TKSST is an unprecedented collection of 6,000+ kid-friendly videos, curated for teachers and parents who want to share smarter, more meaningful media in the classroom and at home. And it's free for everyone. Curated by Rion Nakaya, first launched with her teens when they toddled. Click play and start a conversation. About TKSST 35 If you enjoy the selected videos and writing that keeps this Webby award-winning resource fresh and free for everyone, become a member today. 🐞 IN CASE YOU MISSED IT... It’s Okay to Fart: What are farts made of and why are they funny? What is Protest Art? The historic 1913 women’s suffrage march on Washington D.C. Defacing coins like a British suffragette 🌈 WATCH THESE VIDEOS NEXT... Will YouTube Ever Run Out Of Video IDs? Why the metric system matters Why do honeybees love hexagons? Why are algorithms called algorithms? Vi Hart’s Hexaflexagon Universal Calendar Puzzle: Figure out the day of the week for any date ever Types of Triangles, a Flocabulary math music video Topology, a 1961 Eames film for IBM’s Mathematica Exhibit Three striped balls & a polka dot ball (1976) – Sesame Street Start conversations. Spark questions. Inspire offline exploration. Get smart curated videos delivered every week. SUBSCRIBE ©2011-2024 The Kid Should See This, LLC, TKSST™, TKSST Gift Guide™. All rights reserved. This site is made possible by our members, sponsors, and via affiliate links to our favorite smart books, toys, games + more. Privacy Policy. Made with ♥ in California by Rion Nakaya. Get smart curated videos delivered to your inbox. SUBSCRIBE Hey, you've found the web's best kept secret. Discover kid-friendly videos you can watch with (or without) kids. TKSST is a Webby Award-winning collection of 6,000 videos on 2,500 different topics, all pre-screened by a human, not an algorithm. Get videos delivered to your inbox: Always free, and I promise: no spam. By signing up you're confirming that you're a grownup who wants to receive email from The Kid Should See This. Subscribe Now