This website uses cookies We use cookies to personalise content and ads, to provide social media features and to analyse our traffic. We also share information about your use of our site with our social media, advertising and analytics partners who may combine it with other information that you’ve provided to them or that they’ve collected from your use of their services. You consent to our cookies if you continue to use our website. OK Necessary Preferences Statistics Marketing Show details Skip to content NEWS WELLNESS SMARTER LIVING ENTERTAINMENT RELATIONSHIPS TRAVEL STYLE CORONAVIRUS Home / Smarter Living / 40 Facts About Numbers That Will Make You Feel Like a Mathematical Genius smarter living 40 Facts About Numbers That Will Make You Feel Like a Mathematical Genius BECOME A BONA FIDE, 21ST-CENTURY PYTHAGORUS. By ALEX DANIEL JANUARY 17, 2019 The amount in your bank account. The page count of a book. That rapidly approaching deadline. Times, dates, phone numbers, street addresses—the whole world is numbers. But how much do you really know about them? As it turns out, numbers are a million times more fascinating than the most complex equation Pythagorus could think of. Here's proof. And for more mind-blowing bits of trivia, check out these 40 Facts About Words That Will Make You Say "OMG!" 1 "Hundred" Doesn't Mean 100 The word "hundred" is actually derived from the Old Norse word "hundrath," which actually means 120, not 100. More specifically, "hundrath," in Old Norse, means "long hundred," which equals 120, due to the duodecimal system. But good luck trying to argue that your $100 bill is worth 20 percent more than it is. And for more surprising definitions, check out these 47 Cool Foreign Words That Will Make You Sound Crazy Sophisticated. 2 There Is Only One Even Prime Number The number 2 is also the smallest and first prime number (since every other even number is divisible by two). 3 The Square Root of Two Is Called "Pythagoras' Constant." Surely, you remember the Pythagorean Theorem from your 10th grade geometry class, but have you ever heard of Pythagoras' Constant? Well, here's the lowdown: The square root of 2 (1.41) is known as Pythagoras' Constant. It's also the very first irrational number ever to be discovered. This all has to do with that Greek mathematician Pythagoras, and there is a fascinating history behind his famous theorem that they definitely did not teach you in high school—that Babylonian mathematicians discovered his famous theory 1,000 years before he did! And for more history facts they didn't teach you in school, check out these 30 Crazy Facts That Will Change Your View of History. 4 Zero Is the Only Number That Can't Be Represented In Roman Numerals There are a total of zero zeros in Roman numerals. While the ancient Greeks were aware of zero as a concept, they didn't consider zero to be a number at all. For example, Aristotle decided zero wasn't a number because you couldn't divide by zero. Instead of a Roman numeral, the Latin word "nulla" would have been used to represent the concept of zero. The reason no numeral existed for zero is because there was no need for a numeral to represent it. 5 Different Cultures Discovered Zero at Different Times Shutterstock The idea of zero as a number was invented throughout the world at different times in history. Despite this scattered adoption, it's generally accepted that the Indian astronomer and mathematician Brahmagupta brought up the concept of zero for the first time, around 600 A.D. Besides this, Brahmagupta contributed a lot to mathematics and astronomy, and is known for explaining how to find the cube and cube-root of an integer and also gave rules facilitating the computation of squares and square roots. And for more paradigm-shifting trivia, here are 50 Fun Facts About the World That Will Put a Smile on Your Face. 6 Roman Numerals Were Invented as a Means of Trading The form of record-keeping was used as a means for Romans to easily price different goods and services, and were widely used throughout the Roman Empire for everyday processes. After the fall of the Roman Empire, Roman numerals still continued to be used throughout Europe. This stopped, however, around the 1600s. Roman numerals are represented by seven different letters: I, V, X, L, C, D, and M. 7 Zero Is An Even Number Mathematically, an even number is one that can be divided by two and still create a whole number. Zero meets the criteria for this because if you halve zero, you get zero. But if you're confused, you're not alone: Research from the 1990s, out of Cambridge University, actually revealed that people are 10 percent slower at deciding whether zero is even or not than they are if, say, two is. 8 There Is Only One Number Spelled With the Same Number of Letters as Itself You probably never thought about this before, but there is only one number spelled with the same number of letters as itself. Can you guess which one? No? Well, It's 4. Oh, and the number 4 on a calculator is made up of four light bars. Tell this fact at your next party! (You might not make many friends, though.) And for more cocktail party tidbits, here are 50 Facts So Crazy You Won't Believe They're Actually True. 9 Take Any Number And Multiply It by Three For a Cool Trick Take any number, and multiply it by three. Then, take the digits of that new number and add them all together. Whatever number that equals will always be divisible by three, no matter what number you started with. For example: 3 x 4 = 12 1 + 2 = 3 3 / 3 = 1 10 Six Is the Smallest Perfect Number In number theory, a perfect number is a positive integer that is equal to the sum of its positive divisors. By this rule, six is the smallest perfect number. If you scratched your head and said, "Huh?," here's an example to clarify: 1 + 2 + 3 = 6. The next perfect number doesn't occur until 28. It turns out perfection really is few and far between… 11 The Numerical System We Use Today Is Older Than It's Been in Use The numerical system we use today—the one that is composed of the 10 symbols (you know: 1, 2 ,3, 4, 5 6, 7, 8, 9, 10)—is actually based on a Hindu-Arabic numeral system. This was developed more 1,000 years ago, but it wasn't until the 15th century that these symbols we know today were used throughout Europe. 12 The Number Pi Is Irrational The number Pi—also known as the ratio of the circumference to the diameter of a circle—is irrational. This is because Pi cannot be written as a fraction. Also: Pi, when written as a decimal, never repeats and never ends. Oh, and there's a designated Pi Day (March 14th, or 3/14). 13 2 And 5 Are the Only Prime Numbers That End With 2 And 5 A prime number is a natural number greater than one that cannot be created by multiplying two smaller natural numbers. So, to put that in non-math talk, prime numbers are numbers greater than 1 that can only be formed by multiplying 1 by itself. A natural number greater than one that is not prime is called a composite number. 14 The Fibonacci Sequence Appears in Nature Leonardo Fibonacci was from Pisa. He lived in the 13th Century in Italy, and is credited with discovering a mathematical sequence that's now named after him: the Fibonacci Sequence. Starting at 0 and 1, this sequence is created as the sum of two preceding numbers in the sequence. So, for example: 0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, … The Fibonacci Sequence often appears in nature—most commonly in rabbit litters. (Put one rabbit with another rabbit, and you'll get two rabbits, which spawn three, who then mate to spawn five, and so on.) Also, the song "Lateralus," by the American prog metal band Tool, is written in time with the Fibonacci Sequence. And for more awesome facts about modern music, don't miss these 40 Facts About Music That Really Sing. 15 9 Is Considered a "Magic" Number Shutterstock Have you ever heard that the number 9 is considered to be a "magic" number? No? Well it is, and here is why: if you multiply a number by 9 and add all the digits of the new number together, the sum will always add up to 9. So, for example: 8 x 9 = 72 7 + 2 = 9 Or: 4 x 9 = 36 3 + 6 = 9 See? It truly is magical. Try it out. Every single combination will always lead you back to 9! 16 The Number Pi Spells the Food "PIE" If you pi (to the first two decimal places of 3.14) backwards, in big, blocky letters it actually reads "PIE." Don't believe me? Have a look here. 17 There Are Weird Reasons That Cats Are Said to Have 9 Lives Shutterstock Whether you love cats or hate them, you have most definitely have heard of that myth that these felines have nine lives. But have you ever wondered where this idea came from? It stems from their ability to jump and land without getting hurt! It turns out there are a few theories for the number nine, though, one being that 9, again, is a magical number and was worshipped as such throughout the ages. 18 One Is Not a Prime Number loraks/Shutterstock Often, the number 1 is confused as a prime number. But that's not the case—one does not fulfill the requirements to be prime (being divisible by both 1 and itself). Divide 1 by 1 and you get…1. Nothing has been divided. 19 If a Pizza Has Radius "Z" and Height "A" the Equation Becomes… Since the volume of a cylinder is PI, times the radius squared, times height, that would mean a pizza with radius "Z" and height "A" would have the volume of… PI * z * z * a. 20 Blackjack Didn't Start as 21 Shutterstock Anyone who's played blackjack knows that the goal is to get to 21, or as close to it without going over. But the game is believed to have originated in Italy as the game Thirty One, which dates back to the 15th century. The goal is similar (to get as close as possible to 31) but with some slight differences: all cards between 8 and 10 are removed from the deck and face cards are worth one-half their face value. 21 7 Is the Most Popular "Favorite Number" If you walked up to someone on the street and asked them what their favorite number is—of all the whole numbers between 1 and 100—there's almost a 10 percent chance they will say "7." These were the findings of mathematician Alex Bellos, who asked respondents to identify their favorite number, and found "7" to be the most popular choice. It was selected 9.7% of the time. 22 The Most Popular Two-Digit Number Is 13 Peppermint Joe/Shutterstock You'd think unlucky number 13 would be one that most people want to stay away from. But in Alex Bellos' research, it turned out to be the most popular two-digit number (selected by 5 percent of all respondents), and sixth-most popular number overall (following 7, 3, 8, 4, and 5 in the top five spots—that's right, the number five is also the fifth most popular numbers). 23 There Is Such Thing as Happy Numbers Shutterstock You heard one is the loneliest number, but did you know numbers can be happy, too? To test if a number is "happy," replace it with the sum of squares in its digits, and continue the process until the number equals 1, or loops into a cycle that does not include 1. If the process ends with 1, the number is happy. For example, take 23: 22 + 32= 13 12 + 32 = 10 12 + 02 = 1 That means 23 is a happy number! Counting to 1,000, you'll find there are 143 happy numbers. 24 7 Is Arithmetically Unique The number 7