Search Britannica Click here to search Login Subscribe Home Games & Quizzes History & Society Science & Tech Biographies Animals & Nature Geography & Travel Arts & Culture Money Videos chemical reaction Table of Contents Introduction & Top Questions Historical overview Basic concepts of chemical reactions Classifying chemical reactions References & Edit History Related Topics Images & Videos For Students chemical reaction summary Quizzes Science Quiz Ins and Outs of Chemistry Types of Chemical Reactions 13 True-or-False Questions from Britannica’s Easiest Science Quizzes Related Questions What are the basics of chemical reactions? What happens to chemical bonds when a chemical reaction takes place? How are chemical reactions classified? What are acids and bases? How are acids and bases measured? Discover 8 Animals That Suck (Blood) How Many Electoral College Votes Does Each U.S. State Have? America’s 5 Most Notorious Cold Cases (Including One You May Have Thought Was Already Solved) What Is the “Ides” of March? 7 Surprising Uses for Mummies Ten Days That Vanished: The Switch to the Gregorian Calendar Leap Day, February 29 Home Science Chemistry Science & Tech chemical reaction Print Cite Share Feedback Written by Paul M. Treichel , John C. Kotz See All Fact-checked by The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica Last Updated: Feb 21, 2024 • Article History combustion See all media Category: Science & Tech Key People: Antoine Lavoisier Claude-Louis Berthollet Wilhelm Ostwald Henry-Louis Le Chatelier (Show more) Related Topics: acid–base reaction reaction mechanism catalysis oxidation-reduction reaction ion-exchange reaction (Show more) See all related content → Recent News Feb. 20, 2024, 9:40 PM ET (BBC) 'Dark day' for Birmingham as tax rises and assets sale on way Top Questions What are the basics of chemical reactions? What happens to chemical bonds when a chemical reaction takes place? How are chemical reactions classified? chemical reaction, a process in which one or more substances, the reactants, are converted to one or more different substances, the products. Substances are either chemical elements or compounds. A chemical reaction rearranges the constituent atoms of the reactants to create different substances as products. Chemical reactions are an integral part of technology, of culture, and indeed of life itself. Burning fuels, smelting iron, making glass and pottery, brewing beer, and making wine and cheese are among many examples of activities incorporating chemical reactions that have been known and used for thousands of years. Chemical reactions abound in the geology of Earth, in the atmosphere and oceans, and in a vast array of complicated processes that occur in all living systems. melting ice Melting ice, Lower Purgatory Falls, on a tributary of the Souhegan River between Mont Vernon and Lyndeborough, New Hampshire. Ice melting is a physical change and not a chemical reaction. (more) Chemical reactions must be distinguished from physical changes. Physical changes include changes of state, such as ice melting to water and water evaporating to vapour. If a physical change occurs, the physical properties of a substance will change, but its chemical identity will remain the same. No matter what its physical state, water (H2O) is the same compound, with each molecule composed of two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen. However, if water, as ice, liquid, or vapour, encounters sodium metal (Na), the atoms will be redistributed to give the new substances molecular hydrogen (H2) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH). By this, we know that a chemical change or reaction has occurred. Historical overview The concept of a chemical reaction dates back about 250 years. It had its origins in early experiments that classified substances as elements and compounds and in theories that explained these processes. Development of the concept of a chemical reaction had a primary role in defining the science of chemistry as it is known today. Britannica Quiz Ins and Outs of Chemistry The first substantive studies in this area were on gases. The identification of oxygen in the 18th century by Swedish chemist Carl Wilhelm Scheele and English clergyman Joseph Priestley had particular significance. The influence of French chemist Antoine-Laurent Lavoisier was especially notable, in that his insights confirmed the importance of quantitative measurements of chemical processes. In his book Traité élémentaire de chimie (1789; Elementary Treatise on Chemistry), Lavoisier identified 33 “elements”—substances not broken down into simpler entities. Among his many discoveries, Lavoisier accurately measured the weight gained when elements were oxidized, and he ascribed the result to the combining of the element with oxygen. The concept of chemical reactions involving the combination of elements clearly emerged from his writing, and his approach led others to pursue experimental chemistry as a quantitative science. The other occurrence of historical significance concerning chemical reactions was the development of atomic theory. For this, much credit goes to English chemist John Dalton, who postulated his atomic theory early in the 19th century. Dalton maintained that matter is composed of small, indivisible particles, that the particles, or atoms, of each element were unique, and that chemical reactions were involved in rearranging atoms to form new substances. This view of chemical reactions accurately defines the current subject. Dalton’s theory provided a basis for understanding the results of earlier experimentalists, including the law of conservation of matter (matter is neither created nor destroyed) and the law of constant composition (all samples of a substance have identical elemental compositions). Get a Britannica Premium subscription and gain access to exclusive content. Subscribe Now Thus, experiment and theory, the two cornerstones of chemical science in the modern world, together defined the concept of chemical reactions. Today experimental chemistry provides innumerable examples, and theoretical chemistry allows an understanding of their meaning. Basic concepts of chemical reactions Synthesis When making a new substance from other substances, chemists say either that they carry out a synthesis or that they synthesize the new material. Reactants are converted to products, and the process is symbolized by a chemical equation. For example, iron (Fe) and sulfur (S) combine to form iron sulfide (FeS). Fe(s) + S(s) → FeS(s) The plus sign indicates that iron reacts with sulfur. The arrow signifies that the reaction “forms” or “yields” iron sulfide, the product. The state of matter of reactants and products is designated with the symbols (s) for solids, (l) for liquids, and (g) for gases. The conservation of matter Learn how chemical reactions are balanced through the metaphor of making change Two people making change for five dollars as a representation of how matter is conserved in a chemical reaction. (more) See all videos for this article In reactions under normal laboratory conditions, matter is neither created nor destroyed, and elements are not transformed into other elements. Therefore, equations depicting reactions must be balanced; that is, the same number of atoms of each kind must appear on opposite sides of the equation. The balanced equation for the iron-sulfur reaction shows that one iron atom can react with one sulfur atom to give one formula unit of iron sulfide. Chemists ordinarily work with weighable quantities of elements and compounds. For example, in the iron-sulfur equation the symbol Fe represents 55.845 grams of iron, S represents 32.066 grams of sulfur, and FeS represents 87.911 grams of iron sulfide. Because matter is not created or destroyed in a chemical reaction, the total mass of reactants is the same as the total mass of products. If some other amount of iron is used, say, one-tenth as much (5.585 grams), only one-tenth as much sulfur can be consumed (3.207 grams), and only one-tenth as much iron sulfide is produced (8.791 grams). If 32.066 grams of sulfur were initially present with 5.585 grams of iron, then 28.859 grams of sulfur would be left over when the reaction was complete. The reaction of methane (CH4, a major component of natural gas) with molecular oxygen (O2) to produce carbon dioxide (CO2) and water can be depicted by the chemical equation CH4(g) + 2O2(g) → CO2(g) + 2H2O(l) Here another feature of chemical equations appears. The number 2 preceding O2 and H2O is a stoichiometric factor. (The number 1 preceding CH4 and CO2 is implied.) This indicates that one molecule of methane reacts with two molecules of oxygen to produce one molecule of carbon dioxide and two molecules of water. The equation is balanced because the same number of atoms of each element appears on both sides of the equation (here one carbon, four hydrogen, and four oxygen atoms). Analogously with the iron-sulfur example, we can say that 16 grams of methane and 64 grams of oxygen will produce 44 grams of carbon dioxide and 36 grams of water. That is, 80 grams of reactants will lead to 80 grams of products. The ratio of reactants and products in a chemical reaction is called chemical stoichiometry. Stoichiometry depends on the fact that matter is conserved in chemical processes, and calculations giving mass relationships are based on the concept of the mole. One mole of any element or compound contains the same number of atoms or molecules, respectively, as one mole of any other element or compound. By international agreement, one mole of the most common isotope of carbon (carbon-12) has a mass of exactly 12 grams (this is called the molar mass) and represents 6.022140857 × 1023 atoms (Avogadro’s number). One mole of iron contains 55.847 grams; one mole of methane contains 16.043 grams; one mole of molecular oxygen is equivalent to 31.999 grams; and one mole of water is 18.015 grams. Each of these masses represents 6.022140857 × 1023 molecules. Load Next Page Update Privacy Preferences