Free shipping! | Shop our latest deals! Shop RAM Shop SSDs Solutions Support Upgrade my computer PC users What is a hard disk drive (HDD)? How does a hard drive work? What does a hard disk drive look like? What are the advantages and disadvantages of an HDD? How to improve hard disk performance Other memory storage options FAQs for hard disk drives A hard disk drive (HDD) is an internal or external computer component that stores data, such as the operating system, applications, and user files. HDDs are “non-volatile” storage devices, meaning they retain stored data even when power isn't being supplied. How does a hard drive work? An HDD includes two main elements; a spinning platter and an actuator arm. The platter is a circular magnetic disk containing tracks and sectors that retain data. The actuator arm moves across the platter to read and write data. The platter spins (hence the name) on a spindle to help speed up the read/write process as the actuator arm moves across it. The data sectors are spread out randomly (also known as fragmented) across the platter, and below we'll discuss defragmenting a hard drive to boost performance. What does a hard disk drive look like? The platter and the actuator arm are delicate physical mechanisms, so a solid case covers them to prevent damage under normal use. The hard drive cover will look like a metal box, and it will be clearly labeled as a hard disk drive or HDD. Here's what an internal HDD looks like beneath its metal casing. You can see the spinning platter and the actuator arm, and how they work together to read and write the data upon request. Instead of an HDD, newer computers are usually fitted with an SSD (solid state drive). What are the advantages and disadvantages of an HDD? Advantages of an HDD: Disadvantages of an HDD: HDDs can store a large amount of data (this varies by the drive size) They are relatively cheap compared to other storage solutions HDDs can be slow at retrieving larger files They consume more power The moving parts produce a lot of heat They are less durable, especially in portable devices If you’d like to learn more, check out our article comparing SSDs and HDDs. How to improve hard disk performance As time goes on, you may start to experience HDD lagging, with slow start-ups and longer load times. You can help prevent this by occasionally doing a little maintenance work, which should improve performance immediately after you follow these steps: 1. Defrag your hard disk drive – this reorganizes the data to store it sequentially for faster read times. 2. Delete temporary files – programs and apps can store temporary data that can take up a lot of storage space on your drive. Depending on what Windows version you’re using, these steps may be slightly different: In the search box on the taskbar, type disk cleanup, and select "Disk Cleanup." Select the drive you want to clean up and select OK. Under "Files to delete," select the file types you want to remove. You can also select a file type to read a description of what it is. Select OK when you have made your selections. 3. Remove unnecessary data – freeing space is a great way to improve storage performance. This could be deleting old programs and apps you no longer use or moving photos, films and games over to an external storage device until you need them. These are the steps to remove apps and programs, but this may differ depending on the Windows version in use: In the search box on the taskbar, type programs, and select "Add or remove programs," Select the programs you want. Then select “Remove.” 4. Enable write caching –this step enables the volatile memory (RAM) to collect data in a cache before writing it to the storage device. The cache can process the data faster, resulting in fast load times. Again, these steps may differ depending on the windows that you're using. Right-click "My Computer," and then click "Properties." Click the "Hardware tab" and then click "Device Manager." Expand "Disk Drives." Right-click the drive where you want to turn disk write caching, then click "Properties." Click the "Policies" tab. Click to select or clear the "Enable write caching" on the disk check box as appropriate. Click OK. 5. Upgrade your storage – the quickest way to improve performance is to upgrade to an SSD (solid state drive), which we'll talk about in the next section. Other memory storage options Solid state drives You now have a good idea of how HDDs work, but there's also a new generation of computer storage available – the SSD. SSDs are storage drives that fulfil the same purpose as an HDD, only using a more advanced technology. The benefits of an SSD include: They use less power They produce less heat They don't have moving parts, making them more durable Upgrading to a solid state drive can help boost the performance of your PC or laptop, but one thing to consider when doing so is compatibility. SSDs come in different forms, whether that be SATA or NVMe. The Crucial® System Selector or System Scanner can help you find a suitable SSD for your computer. External storage If you want to increase your data capacity without replacing your internal hard disk, adding an external storage drive is a quick and easy way to expand your storage capabilities. FAQs for hard disk drives What does a hard drive do? What does HDD stand for? Ready to upgrade but not sure what you need? Let's find out: Look up my computer Run a scan 3 step system selector Fill in your system details below and we'll show you 100% compatible upgrades, guaranteed when you buy from Crucial. Enter manufacturer: undefined Enter product line: Enter model: Get stuck? Find your computer from our list, instead People also viewed How Much Memory (RAM) Do you Need? How much RAM do you need? 4GB, 8GB, 16GB, 32GB - or even 64GB? Find out if you need to increase your computer memory with the experts at Crucial. Read this article How to Build a Gaming PC Find out how to build a gaming PC with Crucial. From the parts you need, to building a gaming PC on a budget, check it out now on our website. Read more Crucial Portable SSDs Explore Crucial's range of external SSDs - compare specifications and find the right portable SSD for you. Shop now at Crucial. Explore portable SSDs 10% discount on your next order! Sign up today to receive your welcome offer. Submit The memory and storage experts.™ Contact Us United States Legal Terms of sale Terms of use Your Privacy Choices Privacy Notice Compliance Sustainability Customer Service Contact Order status Payment options Shipping Returns Product registration Warranty Resources Upgrades Storage Executive Acronis Data Transfer Firmware updates FAQs Crucial About Us Products Awards Press Blog © 2024 Micron Technology, Inc. All rights reserved