SIGN IN REVIEW: APPLE VISION PRO WHICH AIRPODS SHOULD YOU BUY? BEST INSTAX CAMERAS HOW TO DOWNLOAD YOUR TIKTOK VIDEOS GET OUR DEALS NEWSLETTER GADGET LAB NEWSLETTER JULIAN CHOKKATTUGEARSEP 21, 2023 8:00 AM Which iPhone Should You Buy (or Avoid) Right Now? The USB-C iPhone 15 is here. If you’re thinking of upgrading, start with our ultimate breakdown of Apple’s smartphones. If you buy something using links in our stories, we may earn a commission. This helps support our journalism. Learn more. Please also consider subscribing to WIRED Featured in this article Best Overall Apple iPhone 15 and iPhone 15 Plus READ MORE $799 AT APPLE (IPHONE 15) Best Budget iPhone Apple iPhone 13 READ MORE $599 AT APPLE The Midrange iPhone Apple iPhone 14 and iPhone 14 Plus READ MORE $699 AT APPLE (IPHONE 14) The Ultimate iPhone Apple iPhone 15 Pro and iPhone 15 Pro Max READ MORE $1,199 AT APPLE SHOW MORE 4 / 13 AFTER 11 YEARS, Apple finally changed the charging port on the iPhone 15 range. Gone is Lightning in favor of USB-C. Is it worth the upgrade? Apple sells eight iPhone models, from the $429 iPhone SE (2022) to the $1,199 iPhone 15 Pro Max. We’re here to help you separate the marketing slogans from reality—we’ve tested the latest models and outlined their strengths and weaknesses so you can make sure you're buying the best iPhone for your needs. Check out our other buying guides, including Best MagSafe Accessories, Best iPhone 15 Cases, Best iPhone 14 Cases, Best iPhone 13 Cases, Best iPhone SE Cases, and Best Apple 3-in-1 Chargers. Wondering what's new in iOS 17? We have details on that too. Updated September 2023: We’ve added the iPhone 15 range and several accessories. Special offer for Gear readers: Get WIRED for just $5 ($25 off). This includes unlimited access to WIRED.com, full Gear coverage, and subscriber-only newsletters. Subscriptions help fund the work we do every day. But First, Sell That Old iPhone! If you’re upgrading from an iPhone, you can trade it to Apple to get a small discount. Before you do that, check whether you can sell it elsewhere for more money. iPhones hold their value incredibly well, particularly if they’re in mint or good condition. We have a guide that runs through a few websites you can use. Don’t forget to back up your old iPhone before you switch to a newer model, which will help you transfer everything without losing any data. Remember to factory reset your old iPhone before selling it. You might find our guides on setting up a new iPhone and how to fix it helpful. And if you don’t want to sell it, we have some ideas on how to repurpose your old device. PHOTOGRAPH: APPLE Best Overall Apple iPhone 15 and iPhone 15 Plus The best iPhone is the one that's going to last you a long time, and it's tough to recommend an iPhone without USB-C, since Apple just abandoned the Lightning charging port (you can read more about this here). If you are on the hunt for a new iPhone—and you don't care for all the bells and whistles—you should go for the iPhone 15 or iPhone 15 Plus (7/10, WIRED Recommends). Both have the same features, but the 6.1-inch iPhone 15 is nicer for people who like small phones, and the 6.7-inch Plus is better suited for large-screen devourers. The Plus also has better battery life. They have OLED displays that get bright enough to see on sunny days, MagSafe support, and IP68 water resistance, plus plenty of power thanks to the A16 chipset. Apple has erased the notch and replaced it with the Dynamic Island, the pill-shaped cutout at the top of the display that houses the selfie camera and Face ID sensors. It also doubles as a way to show passive information, like the ETA for your Uber ride without having to constantly open the Uber app. These iPhones have a new 48-megapixel primary camera that now captures photos at 24 megapixels by default, which means they'll take up more storage space. The trade-off is more detail in your shots. The photos are easily better than those from the iPhone 13 and earlier, though not dramatically different from the iPhone 14 Pro. You also get an ultrawide camera, plus a 2X zoom option that offers up sharper photos than ever before. $799 AT APPLE (IPHONE 15) $899 AT APPLE (IPHONE 15 PLUS) PHOTOGRAPH: APPLE Best Budget iPhone Apple iPhone 13 If you don't need the latest iPhone, don't mind the Lightning port, and don't want to buy used, then save your money and go with the iPhone 13 from 2021 (8/10, WIRED Recommends). This is the oldest iPhone I'd recommend someone buy right now unless you can find an iPhone 12 or 12 Pro for dirt cheap. The cameras won't beat competing phones at this price, like the Google Pixel 7, but they're still pretty good. It comes with 128 GB of storage, 5G, and still has MagSafe support so you can attach various accessories magnetically to the back of the phone. Battery life is more than adequate. Read our Best iPhone 13 Cases guide for protection. $599 AT APPLE FEATURED VIDEO Computer Scientist Answers Computer Questions From Twitter MOST POPULAR GEAR 21 Great Deals From Amazon’s Big Spring Sale LOURYN STRAMPE GEAR Our Favorite Electric Bike Is $500 Off Right Now ADRIENNE SO GEAR Apple Vision Pro Review: A Little Too Far Out JULIAN CHOKKATTU GEAR Is Your Gmail Inbox Full? Here’s How To Clear Out Some Space BOONE ASHWORTH PHOTOGRAPH: APPLE The Midrange iPhone Apple iPhone 14 and iPhone 14 Plus The iPhone 14 and iPhone 14 Plus (7/10, WIRED Recommends) are an awful lot like the iPhone 13, which isn't a bad thing. It has a similar processor—the A15 Bionic with one additional graphics core, so gaming performance is (almost imperceptibly) better. The cameras also produce very similar results. It has the old notch design and all the basics you'd want, from MagSafe and wireless charging to IP68 water resistance. One leg up it has over the iPhone 13 is support for Emergency SOS via Satellite, Crash Detection, and Roadside Assistance. These tools will help you reach emergency services if you're in an area with no service or if you're unresponsive after a car crash (they're also available in the iPhone 15 range). I've found the 6.1-inch iPhone 14's battery lasts a full day with medium to heavy use, but the iPhone 14 Plus often had enough juice to last until the afternoon of the second day off the charger. It even bested the iPhone 14 Pro Max in my testing. If you're frequently turning on Low Power Mode, get the Plus. $699 AT APPLE (IPHONE 14) $799 AT APPLE (IPHONE 14 PLUS) PHOTOGRAPH: APPLE The Ultimate iPhone Apple iPhone 15 Pro and iPhone 15 Pro Max Most people probably don't need to spend this much on a smartphone, but if you absolutely want Apple's best mobile hardware, then I recommend the iPhone 15 Pro Max (8/10, WIRED Recommends). Yes, specifically the larger and priciest model, just because it has battery life that can comfortably go a day and a half and because of its new 5X zoom camera. You're paying so much already, so why not go all the way? It comes with 256 GB of storage by default, too, which befits the “Pro” name. The camera system is one of the best around at the moment, whether you're capturing a subject with the ultrawide or with the 48-megapixel main camera. The latter sensor is 50 percent larger than the 48-MP camera in the base iPhone 15, so image quality is better overall. The new Pro models are made from titanium, which makes them around 10 percent lighter than their predecessors. It sounds small, but it's super helpful in making the Pro Max easier to hold one-handed. Titanium is also more durable and scratch-resistant than stainless steel. Apple has replaced the mute switch with the Action Button, which by default triggers silent mode. You can customize this button to activate other functions, like opening the camera, launching a Shortcut, or toggling the flashlight. The Pro models have the USB 3 standard in the USB-C port, meaning you can access faster data transfer speeds (up to 10 Gbps) compared to any other iPhone, so this is the model to get if you're frequently transferring large files between devices (like video files). They're powered by the A17 Pro, Apple's most powerful mobile hardware chip, and are exclusively the only models that will be able to play AAA games later this year such as Assassin's Creed Mirage and Resident Evil Village. $1,199 AT APPLE MOST POPULAR GEAR 21 Great Deals From Amazon’s Big Spring Sale LOURYN STRAMPE GEAR Our Favorite Electric Bike Is $500 Off Right Now ADRIENNE SO GEAR Apple Vision Pro Review: A Little Too Far Out JULIAN CHOKKATTU GEAR Is Your Gmail Inbox Full? Here’s How To Clear Out Some Space BOONE ASHWORTH PHOTOGRAPH: APPLE The Cheapest iPhone Apple iPhone SE (2022) Apple refreshed its most affordable iPhone for a third generation (7/10, WIRED Recommends) in 2022, though you'll be hard-pressed to spot the differences. Externally, there are none—even cases for the 2020 iPhone SE will fit this version. (We've rounded up our favorite cases and accessories here.) That means you still get a cramped yet compact 4.7-inch LCD screen with a physical home button, thick bezels around the screen, and Touch ID. There's no MagSafe accessory system or headphone jack, but at least you still get plain ol' wireless charging. This is also the only iPhone in the lineup without ultra-wideband support, which improves AirDrop and lets you precisely find nearby AirTags. Internally, the 2022 SE is a whole lot more powerful than the previous generation. It has the same A15 Bionic processor as the iPhone 13 models, making this budget phone a powerhouse among its peers and capable of running the most demanding games. That chip also brings better battery life, but the SE will last you roughly a day of use—less if you're a heavy user. It gets sub-6 5G connectivity, meaning it won't be able to hit the super-fast internet speeds available on pricier iPhones, but this isn't a big deal as you rarely run into that type of millimeter-wave 5G. The single-lens rear camera takes pretty great daytime shots, but there's no night mode, and low-light images are lackluster compared to phones like the Google Pixel 6A. $429 AT APPLE $430 AT BEST BUY PHOTOGRAPH: APPLE If It’s $800 or Less Apple iPhone 14 Pro and iPhone 14 Pro Max Apple completely canceled the iPhone 14 Pro and iPhone 14 Pro Max from 2022, but they're still fine to buy. They have speedy processors and three rear cameras that deliver near-identical photos to the latest iPhone 15 Pro models, so you can zoom out with the ultrawide or zoom in with the telephoto. You get stainless steel frames, excellent OLED displays, daylong battery life, water resistance, and wireless charging. Since the iPhone 15 starts at $829, don't spend more than $800 on these phones. Practically speaking, new models will start to disappear from retailers soon, but you can buy renewed from Amazon. You also may be able to snag one in new or mint condition on resale websites like Swappa. The iPhone 13 Pro and iPhone 13 Pro Max are also totally fine to buy right now, as long as you can find them for $600 or less. Anything more and you may as well pay for the newer devices. BUY AT AMAZON (RENEWED) BUY AT AMAZON (PRO MAX, RENEWED) BUY AT SWAPPA (USED) MOST POPULAR GEAR 21 Great Deals From Amazon’s Big Spring Sale LOURYN STRAMPE GEAR Our Favorite Electric Bike Is $500 Off Right Now ADRIENNE SO GEAR Apple Vision Pro Review: A Little Too Far Out JULIAN CHOKKATTU GEAR Is Your Gmail Inbox Full? Here’s How To Clear Out Some Space BOONE ASHWORTH PHOTOGRAPH: JOSH VALCARCEL/WIRED Avoid These iPhones! Apple iPhone 1-12, iPhone X, iPhone SE (2016) The iPhone 12, 12 Pro, 11, 11 Pro, XS, XR, X, 8, 7, 6S, SE (2016), and every older iPhone that came before them are probably available somewhere,