This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted advertising purposes. You may change your settings at any time or accept the default settings. You may close this banner to continue with only essential cookies. Cookie Policy Storage Preferences Targeted Advertising Personalization Analytics Save Accept All Reject All Explore Topics Curated Content Resources G2 Community Request a demo MARKETING What is an eBook? Understanding Why They Work and How to Make Your Own July 19, 2018 by Jordan Wahl SHARE We live in the age of electronic everything. eCommerce, eBanking, eTickets, eGift Cards, eCigarettes, and the list goes on. Why? Because people love the idea of doing everything from virtually anywhere on any device. With that being said, it’s no surprise that we’ve started revolutionizing the way we do just about everything. What started as a way to make everyday activities easier has made its way to our leisure activities: reading being one that comes to my mind right away. We’ve introduced eBooks as a way of making one of America’s favorite pastimes that much easier. Surprised? I’m not. But, what exactly is an eBook and what can it do? You’d think it’s what it sounds like, an electronic book. However, it’s a little more complicated than that. To clear things up, I’m going to tell you all about eBooks: What is an eBook? eBook formats Popular eBook devices Purchasing eBooks Benefits of eBooks Why create an eBook? How to make an eBook Selling eBooks Distributing eBooks When we’re through, you’ll know everything you need to know about eBooks, and then some. So, let’s get to it. What is an eBook? If you look eBook up in the dictionary, you’d find the following: Noun A book composed in or converted to digital format for display on a computer screen or handheld device. Pretty straightforward. An electronic book; an eBook. But here’s the thing: If an eBook is simply a book in a digital form that, technically, qualifies many things that aren’t actually eBooks. It also doesn’t truly define what makes an eBook an eBook. So what does? What is an eBook? An eBook is a non-editable, reflowable book that is converted to a digital format to be read on any digital device such as computer screens or mobile devices. To have a better understanding of what an eBook really is, let’s take a look at the characteristics of an eBook. Characteristics of an eBook For starters, eBooks are files that you can read on a digital device – a tablet, smartphone, computer, etc. But again, considering other files can be read on digital devices (i.e. word documents) eBooks have specific characteristics that differentiate them. eBooks shouldn’t be editable One distinct characteristic of an eBook: the text should not be editable. An eBook should always be converted into a format that ensures it’s uneditable. With thousands of people having access to it on digital devices, people could potentially change any content without the author’s permission. So, in order to qualify as an actual eBook, text should not be able to be changed in any way, just like a paperback book. eBooks are reflowable (with an exception) Another important characteristic is that true eBooks should be reflowable. This means that no matter what the size of the screen you’re viewing the eBook on, it will always fit your screen; text will remain formatted with line breaks and chapters and images will resize to fit the proportions of the device you’re reading on. There is one exception though: PDFs. Considering PDFs can’t be edited, but they aren’t reflowable, they technically don’t qualify as eBooks according to the characteristics that differentiate eBooks. But with businesses taking advantage of the ease of PDF downloads and distribution, PDFs have become “unofficial” eBooks and are still widely used eBook formats. eBook formats If you were to search for eBook formats, you would come across quite a few options. Dozens actually. However, the likelihood of actually using many of these formats is pretty slim. To keep it simple for you, we are going to just take a look at the three that are known for their ease of use and ability to be used in a format that is widely distributed: EBUP, AZW, and PDF. EPUB (.epub) An EPUB, or electronic publication, is the most widely supported format and can be read on a variety of devices, including computers, smartphones, tablets, and most eReaders (except Kindles). EPUB files are reflowable, which make them true eBooks and easier to read on small devices. AZW (.azw) AZW files were developed by Amazon for its Kindle eReaders. These files can store complex content like bookmarks, annotations, and highlights. But use of AZW files are limited to Kindles or devices with Kindle apps. Additively, they can only be accessed from the Amazon online bookstore. PDF (.pdf) A PDF, also known as a portable document format, isn’t technically a true eBook according to our definition, but it’s the format most people are familiar with. Created by Adobe, PDFs are known for their ease of use and ability to hold custom layouts. Because they hold their format and aren’t reflowable, they can be difficult to read on a small screen. Despite this, they are still one of the most commonly used eBook formats, especially by marketers. Popular eBook devices An eBook can be read on a variety of digital devices; any digital screen really. Below are a few of the most popular devices that eBooks are viewed on: Computers Tablets Smartphones In recent years though, a device called an eReader (electronic reader) was developed specifically for reading and storing eBooks. An eReader is simply a handheld device that eBooks can be read on. Some of the most popular eReader devices include: Amazon’s Kindle Rakuten’s Kobo Barnes & Noble’s Nook Some of these devices were made with built-in lighting so that readers can continue to read once they no longer have access to light. Unfortunately, some of the models don’t have this feature. For convenience, companies like Amazon and Kobo created apps that allow you to continue reading from any device that has the app downloaded. This means that you can start reading from your eReader and when it gets dark, you can finish on your computer, smartphone, or tablet if needed. You might be thinking, “Why purchase an eReader when I can easily use my smartphone or tablet?” Well, there are a few perks eReaders have that those devices don’t. 1. They have great battery life. In fact, their battery life can last for weeks depending on usage. 2. eReaders can hold thousands of books! I don’t know about you, but my iPhone storage fills up pretty fast. There’s no way I could store all of the books I want to read and then some. This isn’t a problem if you have an eReader. 3. They’re easy to read outside. Ever been soaking up the sun while trying to read an article on your computer or smartphone, but you can’t because the LED is basically unreadable? Yeah, eReaders don’t have that problem. Purchasing eBooks There are thousands of retailers that you can buy eBooks from. Some of the most common, eReader-compatible retailers include Amazon, Barnes & Noble, Kobo, and Google Play. You can also go directly to a company or author’s website – many times, authors will promote their eBook on their own site. Benefits of eBooks With eBooks introduced to the world of reading, have you ever wondered what could possibly make them better than traditional paperback books? I have, and here are just a few of the benefits of eBooks: eBooks save space Some people are fortunate enough to have big libraries to store their books. But for the bookworms who don’t have that extra room, eBooks save a tremendous amount of space by allowing readers to store thousands of books on one device. No more searching for space to store your new books. eBooks save money I know this one caught your eye, because who doesn’t want to save money? With no manufacturing or shipping costs, eBooks are cheaper than paperback books. The average price of an eBook rings in at less than $5, whereas paperback books are generally more than $10. Might not seem like much, but it adds up if you’re an avid reader. eBooks save the environment Quite possibly my favorite benefit of eBooks. The book-printing industry consumes 16 million tons of paper each year; that’s 32 million trees. And don’t get me started on the amount of pollution that factories release into the air. Talk about an enormous carbon footprint. With eBooks making up around 30 percent of book sales, they not only save energy and reduce pollution, but they also save approximately 9.6 million of those 32 million trees annually! A win for everyone. eBooks are portable and convenient Anything that makes life easier for people is attractive, and convenience is a real crowd pleaser. eBooks are portable AND convenient. With a supported eBook device, you can have a library at your fingertips. Carrying around your favorite books on your iPad, eReader, smartphone, or table (all lightweight devices!) sounds a lot easier than lugging around a thousand paperback books if you ask me. Instantly download eBooks Nowadays, when people want something, they want it now. You can buy an eBook from virtually anywhere on any eBook supported device with the touch of a button and download it instantly. No more driving to the store and wandering around for hours shuffling through the dozens of bookshelves or waiting for your order to arrive. You can easily access eBooks anytime and anywhere, and start reading right away. You can change the font size of an eBook Depending on the format (excludes PDF), you can change the font size of an eBook. This is especially appealing to those who have a hard time seeing. No more squinting or reaching for your glasses. It’s nice and easy to customize your font size with an eBook. Although you can’t change the font size of a PDF eBook, you still can zoom in on your device. Not as convenient, but still something you can’t do with a paperback book. eBooks are searchable Unlike paperback books, eBooks are easily searchable. Instead of flipping through the pages trying to find a favorite quote or part of the story, you can go back by searching keywords to find the section of your book you were looking for. This is especially helpful when you’re reading long books that would take hours to flip through looking for a specific page. Why create an eBook? If you’re considering making an eBook, it’s most likely for one of two reasons: Self-publication purposes As part of your marketing strategy Whatever the case may be, let’s look at why you should move forward with making an eBook. Self-Publication Whether it’s a research paper or simply a book you’ve been working on, self-publishing an eBook is a great idea for anyone looking to share their ideas with the world. Not sure how to publish an eBook? Don't let that stand in your way; it's pretty easy and worth the effort. Given the fact that eBooks are shareable and easily accessible to readers, new writers can expand their audience by sharing their eBooks online. They’re also a great way to gain confidence on your specific subject matter and improve your writing skills. Creating an eBook to educate readers allows you to expand your knowledge on the topic, establish your expertise, and develop your writing and editing skills along the way. Marketing Strategy eBooks are becoming increasingly popular as part of marketing strategies. This is because content is the backbone of inbound marketing, and the quality of that content can make or break an inbound marketing strategy. When it comes to mastering your strategy, understanding what type of content works best in each stage will help you successfully plan your inbound marketing strategy. eBooks are particularly great assets in the attract stage of the inbound marketing strategy. They create brand marketing awareness and offer value to visitors (potential customers) by giving them something that is useful to them. If you manage to do it right, you can turn those visitors into