AMAZING FACTS BIG QUESTIONS ENTERTAINMENT HISTORY LISTS LIVE SMARTER QUIZZES SCIENCE ALL STORIES NEWSLETTER 10 Tips to Beat the Odds at the Casino By the mag, Jeff Wilser | Jan 19, 2024, 6:16 PM EST You feelin’ lucky? / Randy Faris/The Image Bank/Getty Images Keep Watching Bill Zender is the ultimate gambling insider. The former professional card counter, dealer, and casino floor manager shares his secrets—and explains why the best paying machine is always the ATM. 1. Identify the clumsiest dealers. Zender estimates there are fewer than 100 professional blackjack card counters in the world. If you happen to be one of them, you might nab a 1.5 percent advantage. So save your energy, Zender advises; instead keep an eye out for the sloppy blackjack dealer who will accidentally flash the face-down card. Zender once made a living exploiting this, keeping a notebook of 35 weak dealers from 16 different casinos. The strategy is called “card holing,” and it can give you a 6 to 9 percent edge over the house. (That’s like standing in front of an ATM that spits out twenties!) The best part? “It’s totally legal,” Zender says. “They may throw me out of the casino, but they’re not going to arrest me.” 2. Keep your eyes on the prize. The Vegas Strip. / Robert Mora/GettyImages Lately, casinos have sexed up their table games with bikini-clad dealers and resident pole dancers. These places are called Party Pits, and on the surface, they look like Vegas being Vegas—booze, sin, skin. But look closer. While all those twirling legs keep you distracted, you’ll probably fail to notice that the casino trimmed the payouts at these tables from 3/2 to 6/5. Meaning that a $100 bet wins only $120, compared to the traditional $150. This essentially doubles the house’s edge. 3. Know when to say when. The house always enjoys a 5 percent edge at roulette. You have a decent chance of winning that first spin. And the second. And the third. But if you were to play roulette forever, the house would take away all your chips. Every casino has calculated the point at which they are guaranteed victory, and that magic number is 30,000 hands. (This is why they lure us back with lobster and luxury suites.) So if you’re winning, stop. 4. Exploit the laws of nature. The roulette wheel is a mechanical instrument. Over time, the wheel may become unbalanced or the frets separating the numbers may suffer wear and tear. The more a wheel is used, the more worn down it gets—and the more it may privilege certain numbers. In 1873, Joseph Jagger found a wonky wheel at Monte Carlo and bet on the biased numbers. He came away with $400,000—that’s $7.8 million in today’s dough! 5. Go big or go broke. Know which slot machines to play, and which to avoid. / Christopher Furlong/GettyImages “The average slot machine is probably two, three times more costly to players than the table games,” says Zender. Avoid them. If you insist on cranking a handle, focus on slots that cost $5 or more and play the max bet. On penny slots, the odds are jacked up in the house’s favor by 15 to 20 percent. You might as well toss those coins in a fountain. Don’t forget to make a wish. 6. Don’t play Keno. Really, just don’t. Your chances are terrible. At some casinos, the house has a 35 percent edge. No gambler has ever matched all 20 numbers on a 20-spot ticket. The odds of it ever happening are 1 in 3,535,316,142,212,174,336. (That’s 3.5 quintillion!) 7. Practice makes perfect. If there’s an exception to the adage that the house always wins, it’s in video poker. Typically, the house has only a 0.46 percent advantage (while some versions lean in the gambler’s favor). The pay table is posted right on the machine, and the payoff is high. The catch? To cash out, you need to play at an expert level. Casinos make profits on video poker because most players simply aren’t skilled enough. So study up. 8. Stay away from the light. “Ninety percent of the people who walk into a casino have no idea of the odds stacked against them,” Zender says. But if you know what you’re looking for, it’s easy to see where the odds are the worst. Casinos make the games with the lousiest odds the most attractive by amping them up with flashing lights and bright colors. At craps, for instance, the craziest bets—“the Field,” “Any 7”—are the most colorful. So as a general rule, to better your odds, stick to the drab side of the room. 9. Invest in a nice watch. There’s a reason you probably won’t see any clocks or windows on the house floor. Casinos want you to lose track of time so you play for as long as possible. Some casinos prohibit dealers from wearing watches for that reason. Once you’re up a bit, it might be a good time to leave the floor and go treat yourself to a new timepiece. 10. Buy your own drinks. Experts advise buying your own drinks at casinos. / Sarah Milne500px/Getty Images The truth is, nothing is free—and that includes the free booze. Each casino has something they call a “player reinvestment” fund. It predicts the amount of money you’ll lose and then returns a cut of that in the form of comps, which, to the casual floor visitor, means watery well cocktails. The worse your odds, the better your chances of landing a free drink. Cheers! This story originally appeared in an issue of mental_floss magazine. Related Tags GAMES VIDEO NATURE LISTS THE MAGAZINE NEWS TIPS 17 Basketball Slang Terms to Elevate Your Game Understand your air balls from your alley-oops. By Vince Guerrieri | Mar 20, 2024 Basketball has a language all its own. / Kelvin Murray/Stone via Getty Images Hoops. Roundball. B-ball. When there are so many slang terms for the game of basketball itself, naturally, the sport has its own language. Whether you’re watching a game or playing one, here are a few terms to know to make you sound like a pro. And One! Air Ball Alley-Oop Arc Brick Dagger Downtown Dropping Dimes Fadeaway Garbage Time Granny Shot Key Posterize Raining Rock Sixth Man Swish And One! Yelled after scoring a basket, the phrase and one implies that you were fouled—and will go to the foul line to shoot a free throw. AND1 is also a sports clothing company that was founded in 1993 and found success quickly with its line of trash-talking T-shirts. Air Ball A shot attempt that doesn’t touch any part of the basket or backboard. It is usually met with the crowd yelling “AIR BALL” in unison, loudly, and always in the same tune. Alley-Oop A pass to a player breaking for the basket. If everything goes right, the player leaps, catches the pass in mid-air, and slam-dunks it, possibly posterizing someone (see below). Arc At each end of a basketball court, there’s a semicircle that comes out of the baseline and surrounds the basket. Inside the arc, shots are worth two points; beyond it, they’re worth three. Brick Like an air ball, a brick is another type of woefully missed shot. In this case, however, the ball generally hits either the metal rim of the basket (which itself is sometimes referred to as “hitting iron” or “clanking”) or the backboard—hard—then bounces off. A 1971 issue of Sports Illustrated explained that “Around the league they call them ‘bricks’ because the ball falls like a brick after one of these shots.” Dagger A shot—often a three-pointer—that typically occurs in the last moments of a game and effectively seals a win for a team. Downtown A three-point shot taken from far beyond the aforementioned arc. A shot said to be taken “from downtown” may also be referred to as being taken from “behind the arc.” Dropping Dimes In the era of pay phones, to drop a dime meant “to make a phone call to offer information” (or “to rat someone out”). In basketball, dime is a term for an assist, when a player passes the ball to a teammate who then scores. Dropping dimes is the act of setting up a player, or multiple players, to score many times. Damian Lillard of the Milwaukee Bucks and Miami Heat star Kevin Love rapped about dropping dimes in a State Farm commercial. Fadeaway Fadeaway is a term for a shot where the shooter is falling backward, creating more space between themselves and a potential defender. Garbage Time Time at the end of a game when the outcome is not in doubt, usually when the stakes are lower, and coaches might start giving reserve players who don’t see a lot of floor time a chance to take the court. Granny Shot The term granny shot refers to shooting a free throw underhanded. Rick Barry, who retired from the Houston Rockets following the 1979-80 season, was the last player in the NBA to employ the move—and continues to tout its effectiveness. “With the underhand shot, I could make 80 percent of my throws with my eyes closed,” he explained. “And I do mean closed.” Barry was the leading free-thrower in ABA history, and remains in the top 10 all time in the NBA. Key The area immediately under the basket, stretching out to the foul line. Players stand around the key when a player takes a free throw, but can’t enter it until the shot is released (it’s a foul otherwise). If you stand too long in the key, you can get whistled for a three-second violation. Posterize The term posterize means “being immortalized for the wrong reasons.” If you’re a basketball fan, you’ve probably got a poster of your favorite player, likely in mid-dunk. The defensive player made to look inept on the play is being posterized. Raining On a good shooting night, a player is raining down shots. This was used to comedic effect in Along Came Polly, when the late, great Philip Seymour Hoffman, playing pickup basketball, kept yelling variations on, “Let it rain!” (Spoiler alert: There were a lot of bricks involved.) Rock Another word for the ball, as in: “Gimme the rock! I can’t miss!” Sixth Man In basketball, there are five players on the floor (unless Gene Hackman’s coaching). The sixth man is the first player to come off the bench, usually playing a good number of minutes, but not starting the game. The NBA gives out an annual Sixth Man of the Year Award. Swish A basket where the ball arcs so perfectly that it goes through the hoop without hitting any metal, rendering the basket all but silent, minus the swish of the moving net. 9 of the Best Eczema Treatments, According to Dermatologists Itching for a way to relieve the symptoms of eczema? Experts say these creams, lotions, and ointments can help. By Stacey Marcus | Mar 25, 2024 Don’t let eczema get you down. / LaylaBird, E+ Collection, Getty Images If you’re one of the 31.6 million Americans who has some form of eczema, you’re probably itching for a solution. While potions work wonders for wizards, medical experts are more likely to recommend soothing lotions, creams, and ointments to help alleviate symptoms of the condition, which include severe itch, rash, redness, and sometimes even loss of sleep. To find out more, we reached out to several board-certified dermatologists to explain what eczema really is and give us their top picks for the best eczema treatments you can try at home. Table of contents What Is Eczema? What Causes Eczema? How to Manage Eczema The Best Expert-Approved Eczema Treatments Best Eczema Cream Overall: Vanicream Moisturizing Skin Cream; From $6 Best Splurge: La Roche-Posay Lipikar Balm AP+ Intense Repair Body Lotion; From $29 Best Eczema Cream for Itchy Skin: Aveeno Eczema Therapy Daily Moisturizing Cream With Colloidal Oat & Ceramide; From $16 Best Drugstore Pick: CeraVe Moisturizing Cream; $16 Best Eczema Ointment: Vaseline Original Unscented Healing Petroleum Jelly; From $5 Best Eczema Lotion for Facial Use: Cetaphil Moisturizing Lotion for Dry to Normal Skin; $15 Best Eczema Cream for Sudden Flare-Ups: Eucerin Eczema Repair Cream; $13 Best Eczema Cream for Kids: CeraVe Baby Moisturizing Cream; $9