Betting Sites Casinos Slots Offers 4 NEW Tips News Tipster Comp UK Best Betting Sites UK Bookie Guides Free Bets Best Betting Sites UK | New Online Bookmakers Betting sites licensed by the UK Gambling commission as trusted online bookmakers. New bookies rated and reviewed regularly by experts and long time sports bettors. Choose your new betting site from the list below. Best New Top Rated Filter By Feature 4.0 / 5 22 Ratings The BetMGM sportsbook brings you all the action from the most entertaining sports across the world. BetMGM Review Exceptional customer service New UK Site from a Global Brand Great odds across multiple sports SEE OFFER 4.3 / 5 89 Ratings The only sports betting app where any bet you place could be SUPERCHARGED! Kwiff Review Promotions and Loyalty Club Surprise Bets With Cash Payouts Get Supercharged to anything up to 2000x the odds you take SEE OFFER 4.3 / 5 45 Ratings Your favourite radio station is about to become your favourite betting site with great odds and a wide range of sports to choose from. talkSPORT BET Review Fantastic football offering Plenty of bet boosts across most sports One of the best bookies for Best Odds Guaranteed SEE OFFER 4.3 / 5 218 Ratings Rated #1 Betting app and often best odds to be found on football and racing. Low minimum deposit and great welcome offer to try BetVictor as your online betting site. BetVictor Review Low Minimum Deposit of £5 Regularly best for football and horse racing odds Top three ranked bookie for app, BOG and bet builder SEE OFFER 4.7 / 5 14 Ratings A bookmaker designed for “true sports fans”. Planet Sport Bet is a fantastic betting experience, combined with the very best in sports media and information to help your punting. Planet Sport Bet Review Great customer service Excellent range of promotions One-stop-shop for sports entertainment SEE OFFER 4.1 / 5 32 Ratings The UK’s leading luxury bookmaker, Star Sports was launched as Star Racing in 1999. Star Sports offers a range of boutique bookmaking services to its discerning clients: Star Sports Review Independent Bookmaker The Best Customer Service and Betting Personal Traders for High Stakes Punters SEE OFFER 4.3 / 5 30 Ratings Operating since 1997 Goodwin Racing now brings the online punter BetGoodwin for a personal online betting service BetGoodwin Review Second to None Customer Service Super Fast Withdrawals and £5 minimums New Online Betting Site Launched in 2022 SEE OFFER 4.1 / 5 33 Ratings Sign Up Now To Enjoy Daily Price Boosts, Specials & Free Bet Promotions from BetZone Betzone Review Good In Play betting options Modern and Fresh Betting Platform Innovative Horse Racing Price Display SEE OFFER 4.1 / 5 43 Ratings World leaders in sports spread betting, Sporting Index open up a whole new way of betting on sport, maximising your accuracy in your sporting predictions. Sporting Index Review Fixed Odds Betting Now Available Rated #1 Spread Firm by OLBG Users SEE OFFER 3.9 / 5 11 Ratings Ak bets is a 'Rails' bookmaker bringing customer service and experience to the online market in the UK, for the more discerning customer AK Bets Review Very easy sign-up process Nice “Trader Chat” service Excellent app and website design SEE OFFER 4.2 / 5 83 Ratings With Low minimum deposits to get your started, BOG and great football acca options, VirginBet is more than a gimmicky betting brand and offer daily price boosts too Virgin Bet Review Daily Price Boosts £5 Minimum Deposit Best Odds Guaranteed SEE OFFER 4.4 / 5 33 Ratings An impressive range of sporting events to bet on an equally impressive looking platform bringing freshness to your daily betting. Fafabet Review Excellent free bet club Great Best Odds Guaranteed service Incredible range of sports to bet on SEE OFFER 4.0 / 5 101 Ratings Betfred is known as the Bonus King as you will regularly find bonuses on multiple bets such as Goals Galore, Double Delight & Hat-trick Heaven. Betfred Review Betfred are the Bonus Kings x3 odds on 1 winner for Lucky 15 Great range of football betting markets SEE OFFER 4.1 / 5 156 Ratings Quick sign-up and low minimum deposit are just the start. once inside, you find Unibet rival the very best online bookmakers available to UK customers Unibet Review Low £5 Minimum Deposit Super Quick Sign-Up Process Excellent Bet Club For In Play Betting SEE OFFER 3.8 / 5 43 Ratings The best range of weekly promotions you'll find online. Quinnbet are rapidly becoming one of the most popular bookmakers newly listed on OLBG. QuinnBet Review Great weekly promotions Excellent free bet club Scores in our Top 10 for three categories SEE OFFER 4.1 / 5 43 Ratings Fixed-Odds, Financial Trading and Spread Betting all in one place. Spreadex Review Lucky 15 Bonuses Acca Boosts and First Goalscorer Insurance Fixed Odds, Spread Betting and Financial Trading SEE OFFER 4.0 / 5 1 Rating Enjoy a Premium Digital Betting Experience with Gentleman Jim, one of the UK's newest bookmakers Gentleman Jim Review New UK Betting Site Not Afraid to take Big Bets Truly Premium Racing Experience SEE OFFER 4.0 / 5 38 Ratings A new way to bet. A bookmaker that tells if you have the best price, gives you tips, and asks you what features you want. SBK Review Simple Welcome Offer Ranks in OLBG’s Top 10s for four different categories Live odds comparison – see if you’re getting the best SEE OFFER 4.2 / 5 54 Ratings Styled as the world's finest bookmakers, Fitzdares is now available online. Fitzdares Review Plenty of football-specific bonuses Comprehensive horse racing coverage Imaginative bonuses and offers across different sports SEE OFFER 3.8 / 5 21 Ratings Bet on sports and esports like never before. Midnite is making betting friendly and fan-first. Call the shots with next level betting Midnite Review Instant Withdrawals eSports Betting at its Best Daily Boosts, Acca, Free Bet and Bet Builder Clubs SEE OFFER 4.2 / 5 77 Ratings Parimatch offer live betting on more than 20 sports in 60 countries, with over 200 leagues and 600 sporting events, every day, 24 hours a day. With stats and analysis Parimatch is more than just betting Parimatch Review Serious esports coverage Racing and football offers In-Play betting specialists SEE OFFER 4.1 / 5 264 Ratings Best odds for Horse Racing using Betfair Sp, the exchange is perfect for traders and getting huge odds on outsiders. Seamless sportsbook use and a cracking Casino, Betfair has everything with one registration. Betfair Review Ranked #1 For Footy Accumulators Must have account for Arbitrage Betting Bigger Horse Racing Odds with Betfair SP SEE OFFER 4.0 / 5 3 Ratings Family Brand with on-course values who pride themselves as being an Independent Bookmaker DragonBet Review Best Odds Guaranteed Horse Racing Promotions Only bookie in the UK with markets on specific Welsh events SEE OFFER 4.2 / 5 42 Ratings Enjoy the best online betting experience at LiveScore Bet. Browse all the latest odds across our huge selection of sports betting markets LiveScore Bet Review Price Boosts Excellent in-play betting Exceptional baseball betting SEE OFFER 3.9 / 5 34 Ratings Betdaq operates the world's second-largest online betting exchange, along with sports betting and online casino offerings. Initially sold to Ladbrokes in 2013 for €30m and original owner, Dermot Desmond bought it back in 2021 BetDaq Review Innovative Promotions Exchange Multiples Available Must Have Account for Arbitrage Betting SEE OFFER 4.0 / 5 2 Ratings Launched by a passionate punter, BresBet brings that 'on-course bookie' feel to the world of Online Sports Betting BresBet Review Great customer service Wide range of racing promotions Aim to take all bets, big and small SEE OFFER 3.7 / 5 57 Ratings A new bookmaker offering everything you would expect to make your bets, but adding in new features to stand out from the crowd. Certainly worth a look at the player specials. mr.play Review Play bot betting tips Competitive betting odds Player props and special bets SEE OFFER 4.0 / 5 52 Ratings BetUK offer a dedicated offering centered around Football, Horse Racing and Tennis and do it very well. Super Quick App makes things simple. BetUK Review Acca Club Scores in our Top 10 for five categories Best Odds Guaranteed on horse racing and greyhounds SEE OFFER 4.0 / 5 44 Ratings The Tote: British gambling company since 1928. Sold to Betfred in 2011. Sold to UK Tote Group in 2019. Largest pool betting operator. Based in Wigan. Tote.co.uk Review Placepot App Tote Ten to Follow Unique Betting Options SEE OFFER 4.0 / 5 256 Ratings A fantastic sportsbook with the #1 Rated Weekly FREE BET CLUB. Free Jackpot predictor games with huge prizes and superb eSports betting too. Betway Review Best FREE BET CLUB Free Jackpot Predictor Best Bookmaker for eSports at OLBG SEE OFFER 3.8 / 5 17 Ratings A new bookmaker offering everything you would expect to make your bets, but adding in new features to stand out from the crowd. Certainly worth a look at the player specials. Luckster Sports Review Cash Out Live Betting Competitive Odds SEE OFFER 4.1 / 5 14 Ratings Luckland online Sports betting is for all Sports fans. With over 20 Sports to choose from, both pre-match & live, they have an extensive coverage of leagues and events from all over the world Luckland Sports Review Cash Out Options Seamless Switching to Casino Good Football Betting Options SEE OFFER 3.9 / 5 50 Ratings An excellent exchange alternative to Betfair with attractive commission rates. Exchange accumulators set them apart from the rest. Matchbook Review 2% Commission For All Sports Rated #1 Alternative to Betfair Matchbook Accumulators Now Available ! SEE OFFER 4.0 / 5 2 Ratings MagicRed has always been one of the top online casinos at OLBG but now you can bet on sports on the platform too. MagicRed Sports Review UK and IE Horse Racing Football Focussed Sports Betting Comprehensive in-play betting coverage SEE OFFER 4.4 / 5 1134 Ratings Top rated by OLBG users for years. Ranked as best bookie in more categories than any other. See below for latest account opening offer 18+ t&c's apply, begambleaware.org #ad bet365 Review Rated #1 By OLBG Users Best Football Bookmaker Rated #1 For Bet Builder SEE OFFER 4.0 / 5 34 Ratings No-frills, bet-smart, online sportsbook, designed to cater to both experienced bettors and beginners alike. The live betting hub is clear-cut, with odds clarity and an intuitive mobile-first design BetTarget Review Great coverage of niche sports Brilliant for basketball betting Amazing market depth across multiple sports SEE OFFER 4.6 / 5 8 Ratings ZetBet - Your Ultimate Destination for Limitless Fun, Fair Play and Fabulous Wins! ZetBet Review Good Betting Odds Niche Sports Available Extensive Market Coverage for Football SEE OFFER 3.9 / 5 61 Ratings Superb In-Play betting bookie. If you like betting on football during the game, try Netbet and discover enhancements and special offers. NetBet Review Regular money back offers. Great value enhancements and specials. Wide range of markets available on all of your favourite sports and a leading in-play service. SEE OFFER 4.1 / 5 34 Ratings The pools offers betting on sports, casinos, and are home to the original Football Pools Classic Pools £3 million score draw jackpots. The Pools Review Weekly Free Bet Promotions Footie5 £25k free play game Free Bets on Every UK horse race SEE OFFER 4.1 / 5 20 Ratings Looking for a one stop shop for thrilling sports betting action? BZeebet is your best destination! Created by a diverse group of industry experts with decades of experience, BZeebet is taking online betting to a whole new level Bzeebet Review Fantastic Platform Superb Football Betting Options Cash Out - bet Builder and more SEE OFFER 3.7 / 5 23 Ratings Lottoland Sports offers you a huge selection of sports betting opportunities from around the globe with competitive odds, match statistics and exciting features Lottoland Review eSports & Virtuals Complete Lottery Betting Options Surprisingly Good Football Betting including BetBuilder SEE OFFER 4.2 / 5 17 Ratings All British Sports bring the Brilliant back to Bet Builder and a host of other top class sports betting options across not only to British but International sport too! All