BENCHMARKSCLOSED Nifty22,096.7584.80 FEATURED FUNDS ★★★★★ Canara Robeco Small Cap Fund Regular - Growth 5Y RETURN 25.63 % INVEST NOW News English Edition | Today's ePaper Sign In Holi Offer on ETPrime Home ETPrime Markets News Industry Rise Politics Wealth Mutual Funds Tech Careers Opinion NRI Panache ET TV Spotlight India Decoded Web Stories Morning Brief Podcast Newsblogs Economy Industry Politics ET Explains Company More Business News›News›Sports Sports that are good for losing weight ET Online| Sep 06, 2023, 05:33:40 PM IST 1/6 Cycling Cycling is frequently recommended as a useful aerobic workout. Compared to running or jogging, it allows you to maintain your heart rate at an ideal level while putting less strain on your knees, ankles, and other joints. However, if you decide to take up cycling as a weight loss activity, you can burn a lot of calories while pedaling. Getty Images 2/6 Football Running is a big part of the game of football. While it is known to tone and strengthen your legs, it can also aid in calorie burning. Playing in any position and kicking the ball with your leg while playing the game encourages physical activity and weight loss. It also speeds up metabolism. Getty Images 3/6 Basketball Basketball is a physically demanding sport that helps people lose weight by burning a lot of calories. Basketball requires you to run, leap, change directions, and keep your hand-eye coordination. Because the game involves your entire body, you immediately start to perspire and begin burning calories. Getty Images Amazon Top Deals POWERED BY IFB 30 L Convection Microwave Oven (30SC4, Metallic Silver), STANDARD ₹14,990₹18,990 Buy Now 21% OFF HUL Pureit Eco Water Saver Mineral RO+UV+MF AS wall mounted/Counter top Black 10L Water Purifier ₹13,999₹24,850 Buy Now 44% OFF Elica 60 cm 1200 m3/hr Filterless Autoclean Kitchen Chimney (FL 600 SLIM HAC MS NERO, Touch + Motion Sensor Control, Black) ₹12,490₹24,990 Buy Now 50% OFF VIEW TODAY'S TOP DEALS ON AMAZON » 4/6 Badminton A great way to burn calories is through this sport. When playing badminton, you move forward, backwards, run, leap, bend, twist, sit, and do lunges, stretches, and smashes. As a result, your entire body is actively involved, burning calories and promoting weight loss. Getty Images 5/6 Swimming One of the best sports for shedding pounds and burning calories is swimming. Swimming increases full-body movement inside the pool, which maximizes calorie burning. Because you are underwater, you might not feel as warm as you would when exercising ordinarily. Getty Images 6/6 Boxing One of those fitness trends or workouts that always ranks at the top is boxing. You need to maintain a high degree of athletic prowess when you choose boxing as your weight loss sport activity, including strength, speed, agility, and hand-eye coordination. These exercises can be used for both athletic and fitness-related goals. Getty Images Read more on Sports Weight Loss Lifestyle Disorders Sports For Weight Loss Popular Slideshows The best high-protein Indian breakfast items to gain muscle Kriti Kharbanda mehendi lehenga design, decoded by designer Common fruits and vegetables with most pesticides Maruti Suzuki among 3 stocks that witnessed 5-year swing high breakout 4 F&O stocks saw a high increase in futures open interest 8 stocks that were trading below Rs 10 have turned multibaggers in FY24 After US, 3 largest stock markets are from Asia. Here's the list Sudha Murty On Three Life Lessons Everyone Needs To Learn Holi 2024: Trending Rangoli Design Ideas to Brighten Your Home These 4 stocks saw a high increase in futures open interest Most Popular News India plans to shift from minimum wage to living wage by 2025 Full Worm Moon: How and when to witness the first Lunar Eclipse of 2024 in the USA IT companies in Bengaluru urged to give 15 lakh employees WFH option as city grapples with water crisis Lunar eclipse 2024: Is Chandra Grahan on Holi visible in India? Check key details here BJP releases 5th list of candidates with 111 names; fields Kangana Ranaut from Mandi, Ramayana actor Arun Govil also gets ticket Trending Now MORE IPL Full Schedule 2024RCB vs PBKS Live ScoreIPLin USAHappy Holi WishesElectoral Bond Data Hot On Web MORE IPL Full Schedule 2024RCB vs PBKS Live ScoreIPL in USAHappy Holi WishesElectoral Bond Data In Case You Missed It MORE IPL Full Schedule 2024RCB vs PBKS Live ScoreIPL in USAHappy Holi WishesLok Sabha Election 2024 Top Calculators MORE Standard Deviation CalculatorIncome Tax CalculatorAge CalculatorTime CalculatorBMI Calculator MORE Top Searched Companies Adani Ports SEZ Share PriceAdani Power Share PriceLeadmini RateAdani Green Share Price MORE Top Definitions ProductFpoCurrency SymbolRepo RateMapsko Builders Private LimitedAccounting Other Useful Links MORE About UsArchiveTerms of Use & Grievance RedressalEconomic Times ePaperPrivacy policyBook your Newspaper SubscriptionContact Us Copyright © 2024 Bennett, Coleman & Co. Ltd. All rights reserved. For reprint rights: Times Syndication ServiceCookies Settings