Discover
Undergraduate
Postgraduate
Money & student life
Apprenticeships
Careers
Search
Sign in
Add to favourites
HomePostgraduate
POSTGRADUATE UK: INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS
Explore this section
If you want to study a postgraduate course in the UK, start here to find out how to apply and find out more information.
Why study in the UK?
UK universities and colleges are diverse, multicultural, creative and welcoming
They offer top quality teaching and great career prospects
Over 430,000 international students study here yearly, from over 180 countries
There's also the chance to improve your English language skills
Benefits of studying in the UK
Over 45% of international students in the UK are here to complete a postgraduate degree, because it has some of the world’s top-ranking universities, leading the way in pioneering research and academic studies. This page explains the postgraduate options available, how to apply, and some of the benefits of studying in the UK.
FAQs for international students
Thinking about postgraduate study in the UK can give international students a lot to consider. Here are answers to the most common questions.
Visa, immigration and English Language Tests (ELTs)
Visas and English language tests apply to many international applications. Find out what you need to do and when to apply for yours.
Moving to and living in the UK
Most universities provide a range of activities to help you settle into UK life. Here are some tips about moving to and living in the UK.
UCAS International App
The UCAS International App opens up countless opportunities for students around the world to study in the UK. Download the Android or iOS app for free today, and you can:
search and explore postgraduate courses in the UK
research different UK universities and colleges
get matched to funding and scholarships opportunities
view and apply for live accommodation around the campus of your choice
find a part-time job within the local area of the university you are looking to study at
make PGT applications to select universities and colleges via the App.
… all within one easy-to-use app on your mobile or desktop. The UCAS International App is here to support you through every step of your journey to study in the UK. 
Download the app on Apple or Google Play
10 ways to choose a UK university
There are lots of different ways to choose a university as an international student. Even if you live in a different country, here's how to find out more about your options.
How to choose a university
  Studying in the UK
If you're thinking of studying in the UK, find out what it's like from other international students studying here.
  How to apply
Firstly, the way that UK higher education works means there are different rules for UK, EU and international students. We’ll highlight the similarities and differences throughout ucas.com – but to get started, take a look at our guidance, containing all the things you'll need to think about if you're considering postgraduate study in the UK:
Thinking about postgraduate study – for international students (1.02 MB)
You do some of your research on ucas.com, and you apply directly to the provider for the course.
Then get started on what to study, when to apply and how to get a place and a visa
Get started.
Find a course, and look out for our advice on how to choose a suitable course and university or college
Find a course.
Apply to study in the UK
You'll apply directly to the university or college.
Then look at finance and support
Look at finance and support if you need to arrange visas and to pay course fees or adjust to life in the UK.
  International top tips
We asked advisers from around the world for their tips for international applicants to the UK – here's what they said.
Research the types of accommodation
There are lots of options – from halls to shared houses. Take the time to look at both university and private student accommodation.
Use our accommodation search
Finding somewhere you'll be happy to live is an important part of deciding where you want to study. Use our search tool to find the right place for you.
What support is available at university?
UK universities provide their students with a wide range of support before, during, and after they have completed their studies.
Six support organisations that help international students 
There are plenty of support organisations available for international students. Here are our six favourites.
  Case studies from international students
Find out why Jianwei from China, Patricia from Egypt, and Maupe from Nigeria chose postgraduate study in the UK.
Ayesha Khalid – postgraduate case study
Ayesha came to the UK to study a social science course at Bristol University.
You might also like to read
Favourite this event
Why should I choose the UK for postgraduate studies?
Over 45% of international students in the UK are here to complete a postgraduate degree, because it has some of the world’s top-ranking universities, leading the way in pioneering research and academic studies. This page explains the postgraduate options available, how to apply, and some of the benefits of studying in the UK.
Favourite this event
FAQs for international students
Thinking about postgraduate study in the UK can give international students a lot to consider. To help, here are answers to the most common questions.
Favourite this event
Moving to and living in the UK
Most universities provide a range of activities to help you settle into UK life. Here are some tips about moving to and living in the UK.
Sponsored articles
Student finance for postgraduate loans
UCAS article
Five reasons to sign up to the UCAS newsletter
UCAS article
How to find a job
UCAS article
Contact us
TikTok Instagram YouTube LinkedIn Facebook Twitter
Advisers
Providers
Businesses
Employers
About us
Join our team
Accessibility
Our data and analysis
Glossary
Terms and conditions
Privacy and cookies
Modern slavery statement
© UCAS 2024