Study at Cambridge
About the University
Research at Cambridge
Quick links
Undergraduate Study
Home
Why Cambridge
Courses
Colleges
Finance
Applying
International
Open Days and Events
Find out more
  Applying to Cambridge
Undergraduate Study
Applying
Application timeline
Before you apply
How to apply
After you apply
Why Cambridge
Courses
Colleges
Finance
International
Open Days and Events
Find out more
Applying as a mature student? Visit our Mature student applications pages to find out more.
We‘re excited you’re thinking of studying an undergraduate degree at Cambridge. Join us to experience world-class teaching and learning at one of the best universities.
Before you apply
Are you starting to explore your university options? You can:
Take a look at undergraduate courses at Cambridge. We have 31 exciting degrees and a Foundation Year for you to choose from.
Find out more about our entry requirements. We accept a wide range of qualifications from all over the world.
Check tuition fees and course fees and work out your living costs. 
Learn about admission assessments that you need to take. These are tests that you need to do as part of your application. You’ll need to register in advance for some tests.
Explore our Colleges. We have many options for you to choose from. Your College is where you’ll live and have your supervisions, which are small group teaching sessions. You can choose a College when you apply for a course or make an open application.
Visit us on an open day or join one of our events to discover Cambridge for yourself.
Get help to choose your high school or sixth form subjects and combinations, such as A level or IB, if you haven’t picked them already.
Take a look at our application statistics.
Get tips and suggestions for things you can do to improve your university application so you can stand out from the crowd.
How to apply
Ready to apply? It’s time to:
Register and prepare for your admissions assessment (if required for your course).
Read our tips to complete your UCAS application and write a great personal statement.
Prepare to complete My Cambridge Application. This is an extra form that you need to fill in once you’ve submitted the UCAS application. Don’t worry, we’ve put together guidance to help you.   
Let us know if your studies have been disrupted.
After you apply
Once you submit your UCAS application and My Cambridge Application, you can:
Check if you need to submit any written work or a portfolio and how to send it to us.
Find out what happens during your interview and how to prepare for your interview. See what kind of questions we might ask, and what we expect from you.
Prepare for your written College admission assessment (if required for your course). Check what you need to do and have a go at some sample papers.
Check what you need to do when you get your application decision from Cambridge. You can also read about how we decide who gets a place.
Learn what happens if you’ve been invited to submit your application for reconsideration, how the process works, what you need to do and when you’ll find out if you got a place.
When you get your exam results, check what to do next.
External consultants
We’re aware of private companies and individuals who offer, at a charge, information and advice on our admissions process, assessments and interviews. We DO NOT support or encourage any of these commercial enterprises. None of these companies/individuals has access to any information that’s not already available free of charge to all schools, colleges and individual students from College admissions offices, the Cambridge Admissions Office or Cambridge Students’ Union; and we’re unable to verify the accuracy of information these companies/individuals may provide. Please contact the admissions office at any College or the Cambridge Admissions Office for more information.
Related Links
Admissions policy
Extenuating circumstances
Mature applications
International applications
Second undergraduate degrees
Care leaver applications
Disabled student applications
Applying from Wales
Applying from Scotland
Cambridge Admissions Office
Cambridge Admissions Office
Student Services Centre
New Museums Site
Cambridge
CB2 3PT
01223 333308
admissions@cam.ac.uk
www.cao.cam.ac.uk
About this site
Our website
Cookies
Privacy policy
Participant data and booking policies
Contact us
Information for
Teachers and advisers
Parents and supporters
International students
Disabled students
Mature students
Care leavers and estranged students
© 2024 University of Cambridge
Contact the University
Accessibility
Freedom of information
Privacy policy and cookies
Statement on Modern Slavery
Terms and conditions
University A-Z
Study at Cambridge
Undergraduate
Postgraduate
Continuing education
Executive and professional education
Courses in education
About the University
How the University and Colleges work
Give to Cambridge
Jobs
Map
Visiting the University
Research at Cambridge
Research news
About research at Cambridge
Public engagement
Spotlight on...