Study at Cambridge
About the University
Research at Cambridge
Quick links
Home
Courses
Undergraduate Study
Home
Why Cambridge
Courses
Colleges
Finance
Applying
International
Open Days and Events
Find out more
  About our courses
Undergraduate Study
Courses
About our courses
Teaching and learning
Facilities and resources
Subject A-Z
Why Cambridge
Colleges
Finance
Applying
International
Open Days and Events
Find out more
Courses at Cambridge
At Cambridge, we offer a range of courses, across the arts, humanities, and sciences. One of the most distinctive characteristics of our courses (also called Triposes*) is that they generally cover the subject area very broadly in the initial years and then a wide range of specialist options in the later years. 
If you know what you want to focus on you can start to specialise early on or, if you’re undecided, you can delay specialising until you’ve had the chance to fully explore the breadth of your subject and developed your interests. Either way, by graduation you’ll have the same depth of understanding and specialist knowledge as other graduates in the field.
Generally, the number of subjects to choose from increases each year. In addition, some papers (topics) are offered in numerous courses. For example, some Classics and language papers are available in the English course. Beyond any compulsory papers you can usually select your topics from a variety of options.
*Sometimes, at Cambridge, your course might also be referred to as a Tripos. For example, the Mathematics course may also be known as the Mathematics Tripos.
Course structure
Our courses are divided into 'Parts', with each Part lasting one or two years. In each Part, you take a number of 'papers' (subjects, topics) – some of these are compulsory papers that all students must take; and some are optional, meaning you choose a certain number from a range of optional papers available that year. See course outlines and refer to the faculty/department websites for details.
You must pass exams in two Parts to graduate with an Honours degree, and all of our degrees lead to the award of a BA (Hons). Engineering and some science subjects also have a further optional Part that leads to an MEng or MSci degree. Each course fact file indicates the degree(s) awarded.
However, students who are studying a second undergraduate degree and already have a BA with Honours from the University of Cambridge will not be a candidate for Honours in any Honours examination.
All of our undergraduate degrees are full-time courses. All students must ordinarily be available to study in Cambridge for the full duration of their course (with the exception of a year abroad, where part of the course).
Shared papers
Many of our courses encompass several subjects – more than 65 subjects are offered within over 30 undergraduate courses – and, generally speaking, the number of options to choose from increases each year.
In addition, some options/topics (usually called papers at Cambridge) are available in several degree courses where the subjects overlap – these are known as 'shared' papers, but may also be referred to as 'borrowed' papers – for example (see the course outlines for details):
some Classics and language papers are available in the English course.
some Modern and Medieval Languages papers are available to Anglo-Saxon, Norse, and Celtic students.
Theology, Religion, and Philosophy of Religion ‘shares’ the Meaning paper from Part IA of the Philosophy course.
This means that, beyond any compulsory papers, you can usually choose subjects from a variety of options and your choices may not be limited to those within your immediate subject field.
Assessment
You will take assessments for the papers that you've studied in each Part of your course. Your overall result for a Part is determined by your assessment results.
At the end of your degree you will also get an overall degree classification. This classification (for example, first or 2.1 etc) will be on your University transcript, which shows all of your assessment results. You will be given a transcript as well as a degree certificate.
The way the University calculates your overall degree classification varies between courses. Currently, this is typically:
30% based on work completed in your second year and 70% based on work completed in your third year
or
100% based on work completed in your third year
If you are taking Medicine, Veterinary Medicine, or a degree with an integrated masters, this classification will be for your BA only. For example, you would be assessed separately for your masters level study.
To achieve an Honours degree you must have been in Cambridge for the required number of terms (usually nine) and achieve a class (eg second class) in Part II or Part III of your course, or Part IIA or IIB of your course, or the Management Studies course.
Written exams are the main form of summative assessment used – typically, you sit between four and eight written exams for each Part.
In many science subjects, a specified amount of practical work is assessed.
Most courses include a research project or dissertation – these may be in addition to or as a substitute for a written exam.
Results of assessments are typically released between four and eight weeks after exams/submission.
With the exception of professional qualifying examinations in Medicine and Veterinary Medicine, there usually aren't opportunities to resit any exams at Cambridge.
See the course outlines and individual department/faculty websites for details about assessment methods.
Changing course
Due to scope and flexibility of our courses, most students stay on the same degree course but it may be possible to change (with agreement from your College, though there is no guarantee that such requests will be permitted). The more popular/common course changes are listed under the relevant course page - you can find your course page here.
To be able to change course, you need the agreement of your College that any change is in your educational interests, and you must have the necessary background in the subject to which you wish to change – in some cases you may be required to undertake an admissions process, some catch-up work or take up the new course from the start/an earlier year. If you think you may wish to change course, we encourage you to contact a College admissions office for advice. You should also consider if/how changing course may affect any financial support arrangements.
Choosing a Course at Cambridge
Related Links
Applying
Entrance requirements
University term dates
Cambridge Explained
Cambridge Admissions Office
Cambridge Admissions Office
Student Services Centre
New Museums Site
Cambridge
CB2 3PT
01223 333308
admissions@cam.ac.uk
www.cao.cam.ac.uk
About this site
Our website
Cookies
Privacy policy
Participant data and booking policies
Contact us
Information for
Teachers and advisers
Parents and supporters
International students
Disabled students
Mature students
Care leavers and estranged students
© 2024 University of Cambridge
Contact the University
Accessibility
Freedom of information
Privacy policy and cookies
Statement on Modern Slavery
Terms and conditions
University A-Z
Study at Cambridge
Undergraduate
Postgraduate
Continuing education
Executive and professional education
Courses in education
About the University
How the University and Colleges work
Give to Cambridge
Jobs
Map
Visiting the University
Research at Cambridge
Research news
About research at Cambridge
Public engagement
Spotlight on...