Search
Menu
The rise of Dawn
The UK’s fastest AI supercomputer, Dawn, is supporting ambitious goals in clean energy, personalised medicine and climate. Take a look at how Dawn is being used.
Undergraduate
Learn more
about undergraduate study
Find your
undergraduate
course
Postgraduate
Learn more
about postgraduate study
Find your
postgraduate
course
Video of Can robots read braille?
Libraries
Museums
Research
Business and enterprise
Alumni
Sport
News
Updates from across the University
News - Celebrating women in STEM
To mark the International Day of Women and Girls in Science, two of our academics speak about their research careers and how they ended up using their STEM interests to tackle climate change.
Awards - Using AI to tackle society's biggest challenges
Five winners of a new AI challenge have been picked by ai@cam. The prize supports ambitious ideas for how artificial intelligence can address critical societal issues.
Features - Cancer isn't fair but care should be
We are listening to people's lived experiences to help improve awareness of and access to cancer care. Take a look at how our researchers are working with communities to close the cancer care gap.
See more news
Events
Concerts, lectures, sports events, and more
Sport - Varsity Rugby Matches - Saturday 2 March
The legendary Cambridge vs Oxford Varsity Rugby Matches will be taking place at Saracens StoneX Stadium. Secure your tickets to witness the exciting action and fierce competition of the 141st men’s and 36th matches.
Lecture - The Darwin Lectures: revolution - until 8 March
This year’s Darwin Lecture series takes the pretty big topic of revolution as its theme. To some revolutions are dangerous, fearsome and worrying … to others they’re exciting and provide an opportunity to change society for the better.
Festival - Cambridge Festival cancer events - from 13 March to 28 March
New types of cancer treatment – which use the body’s immune system to fight the disease and are “kinder” to patients than chemotherapy ­– will feature at this year’s Cambridge Festival.
See more events
Student perspectives
Video of Am I doing good enough A-levels? #VersusPastDoubts
Have you chosen your A-levels yet? Your subjects don't define who you are, but the passion that you have for your subject does. Here's some advice from Cambridge students Amenie and Denzel that worked for them before they applied.
YouTube
Cambridge on Instagram
Cambridge is awash with colour as our community marks the start of LGBT+ History Month. Follow us on Instagram for snapshots of our people and places.
Instagram
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
LinkedIn
Twitter
YouTube
Tik Tok
University of Cambridge
© 2024 University of Cambridge
Contact the University
Accessibility statement
Freedom of information
Privacy policy and cookies
Statement on Modern Slavery
Terms and conditions
University A-Z
Study at Cambridge
Undergraduate
Postgraduate
Continuing education
Executive and professional education
Courses in education
About the University
How the University and Colleges work
Give to Cambridge
Jobs
Maps
Visiting the University
Cambridge University Press & Assessment
Research at Cambridge
Research news
About research at Cambridge
Public engagement
Spotlight on...