Skip to content
About
Programs
Locations
Admission & Tuition
Apply
Brochure
Contact
Choose A Program
We offer a unique learning environment and innovative curricula for Preschool Prep, 2s, 3s and 4s.
Our Preschool Prep program meets 2 or 3 days per week for 1 ½ to 2 hours per day, focusing on sensory and social development through art, gym, music, science, language, and math. It’s the perfect first school experience for many children. This is an adult participation program.
Preschool Prep Program »
Our 2s program meets 2, 3 or 5 days per week for 3 hours per day and incorporates art, gym, music, science, language, and math with a focus on sensory and social development.
2s Program »
Our 3s program is a 2-, 3-, or 5-day-per-week, three-hour-per-day learning experience. The innovative curriculum of this program employs interactive literacy and thematic learning experiences that strengthen social, intellectual and physical skills in every child through language, math, science, social studies, gymnastics, dance and art lessons.
3s Program »
Our 4s program is a 5-day-per-week, 5- or 6-hour-per-day program that supports each student as he or she develops confidence in learning. Our classes are taught in a fun, caring, nurturing, positive and clean environment. Our innovative curriculum builds beyond the fundamentals as teachers encourage interactive literacy and thematic learning experiences that strengthen social, intellectual learning through physical science, social studies, gymnastics, dance and art.
4s Program »
New York Preschool has been accredited by the National Association for the Education of Young Children.
About
History
Philosophy
Brochure
Programs
Preschool Prep
2s
3s
4s
Admission
Process
Tuition
Contact
Schedule a Tour
Locations
Careers
Privacy
Locations
3rd Avenue
22nd St.
67th St
68th St
89th St
94th Street
Battery Park
Brooklyn Heights
Cobble Hill
Court Square
Dumbo
Greenwich Village
Long Island City
Park Slope
Sutton Place
Tribeca
West End
Subscribe
Email Sign Up
Copyright © 2023 NY Preschool. All rights reserved.

Manage consent