Discover
Undergraduate
Postgraduate
Money & student life
Apprenticeships
Careers
Search
Sign in
Add to favourites
HomeExploreSubject guides
AGRICULTURE AND RELATED SCIENCES
Agriculture and related sciences bring together a wide range of disciplines including, for example, animal and land management, food science, economics, horticulture, technology, and environmental conservation.
Video of Making waves in the aquarium research community
Who studies agriculture and related sciences at university?
93%
UK students
7%
international students
78%
full-time students
22%
part-time students
Graduate destinations
15,130 students were studying this subject in 2014/15.
69.3% of graduates went directly into employment.
Top five graduate destinations:
Professional, scientific, and technical
Agriculture, forestry and fishing
Wholesale and retail trade
Manufacturing
Arts, entertainment, and recreation
Find out what life is really like at uni
Chat with students, ask questions, and share experiences.
Entry requirements
A levels – To get on to a related degree, you will usually need a minimum of two A levels, with three A levels and A/B grades required for the most popular courses. Entry requirements range from BBB to BCC, with the universities and colleges most commonly asking for CCC. Most degrees in this field ask for at least one science A level (biology is often required for degrees in animal science and veterinary nursing), with two preferred by many. It is important to check precise requirements with universities, as some are more flexible around which subjects they regard as a science.
Scottish Highers – Entry requirements for Highers (the most common qualification) range from BBBC to ABBBB, with universities or colleges most frequently requiring BBBB. Occasionally, universities ask for Advanced Highers to supplement Highers. If Advanced Highers are requested, universities or colleges typically ask for AB.
Vocational courses – Other Level 3/Level 6 qualifications (e.g. Pearson BTEC Level 3 National Extended Diploma in Animal Management Science, SVQ Animal Care (SCQF Level 6)) may be accepted as an alternative to A levels/Highers by some providers. It’s essential that you check alternative entry requirements with universities or colleges
What courses are available?
Universities and colleges in the UK are offering courses in the following subject areas:
Animal science
Agriculture
Forestry and arboriculture
Food and beverage studies
Food science and nutrition
Agricultural sciences
Plant science
Environmental science and biology
A number of courses are accredited by their respective awarding bodies to show they provide the knowledge and skills required by employers in that field, e.g. ecology, nutrition, and arboriculture. There are also a number of veterinary nursing courses on offer that lead to professional accreditation in this career.
Subject combinations and available course options include:
single, joint, and multiple subject combinations
full-time, part-time, and flexible study options, as well as courses with a placement (sandwich courses)
qualifications ranging from BSc (Hons) degrees, through to HND, HNC, and Foundation Certificates
Personal statement
Competition for places can be high so personal statements form an essential part of the selection process. Admissions tutors want to see you have aptitude, interest, and motivation in your chosen subject. Many of these degrees are practical and vocational, which means some previous experience can be important.
Universities will be looking for evidence that you have a real enthusiasm for the subject and related careers, which could be demonstrated by:
additional reading and research
membership of related societies/clubs – e.g. local conservation group
How to write your personal statement
Apprenticeships
If you want to combine work and study while earning a salary, you could consider an apprenticeship. Which apprenticeships are available, and how you apply, depends on where you live.
Find out more about apprenticeships across the UK.
There are over 20 apprenticeships in the agriculture, environmental and animal care sector available in England, with more in development.
Each apprenticeship sets out occupational standards for specific job roles, designed by employers. The standards outline the skills, knowledge, and behaviours required to demonstrate that an apprentice is fully competent in the job role.
Higher apprenticeship (Level 4)
Animal trainer
Degree apprenticeships (Levels 5 – 7)
Environmental practitioner (degree)
Ecologist (degree)
Discover more about apprenticeships in agriculture, animals, horticulture and the environment, or natural sciences
Our guides have all the info you need to know about doing an apprenticeship in this industry. Find out what it's really like from current apprentices and decide which is the right route for you.
Agriculture, animals, horticulture and the environment industry guide
Natural sciences industry guide
Key areas of employment
This subject area has a strong vocational link, with the key areas of employment being management, consultancy, development, and research in the following sectors:
agriculture, forestry, and horticulture
education
engineering and manufacturing
environment and conservation
local and central government services
pharmaceutics
sales and marketing
technical media and journalism
voluntary and charitable organisations
Related careers
Examples of related careers include the following:
animal nutritionist
arboricultural officer
agricultural consultant
countryside officer
environmental consultant
field trials officer
farm manager
fish farm manager
food scientist
forest manager
horticultural consultant
plant breeder/geneticist
research scientist
veterinary nurse
Where can I find out more?
Visit the websites of the following professional bodies to find out more about courses and careers in agriculture and related sciences.
Lantra
Institute of Horticulture 
Institute of Chartered Foresters
Chartered Institute of Ecology and Environmental Management (CIEEM) 
Association for Nutrition
Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons
START YOUR SEARCH NOW
GET YOUR UCAS HUB
Your place to discover your options and research your future.
Sign up today
Advertisement. Why the ads?
Advertisement. Why the ads?
Search uni and colleges for agriculture and related sciences courses
Explore courses
See all
Agriculture
Coleg Sir Gar
FdSc · 2 Years · Full-time · Llanelli · 2024-2025
Tariff points: 40/40
Agriculture
Nottingham Trent University
BSc (Hons) · 3 Years · Full-time · Southwell · 2024-2025
Tariff points: 104/112
Agriculture
University Centre Askham Bryan
BSc (Hons) · 3 Years · Full-time · York · 2024-2025
Tariff points: 84/84
Agriculture
Hartpury University
BSc (Hons) · 4 Years · Sandwich · Gloucester · 2024-2025
Tariff points: 96/96
Horticulture
Writtle University College
DipHE · 2 Years · Full-time · Chelmsford · 2024-2025
Tariff points: 80/80
Agriculture
Royal Agricultural University
BSc (Hons) · 3 Years · Full-time · Cirencester · 2024-2025
Tariff points: 104/104
Agriculture
SRUC Scotland's Rural College
BSc (Hons) · 4 Years · Full-time · Edinburgh · 2024-2025
Tariff points: 96/112
Agriculture
University of Reading
BSc (Hons) · 3 Years · Full-time · Reading · 2024-2025
Tariff points: 120/141
Agriculture
University Centre Sparsholt
FdSc · 2 Years · Full-time · Winchester · 2024-2025
Tariff points: 64/80
Agriculture
Aberystwyth University
BSc (Hons) · 3 Years · Full-time · Aberystwyth · 2024-2025
Tariff points: 96/120
Environmental Conservation
Bangor University
BSc (Hons) · 3 Years · Full-time · Bangor, Gwynedd · 2024-2025
Tariff points: 104/128
Agriculture
Bedford College Group
FdSc · 4 Years · Part-time · Biggleswade · 2024-2025
Tariff points: 32/32
Agriculture
University Centre Bishop Burton
FdSc · 3 Years · Part-time · North Carlton · 2024-2025
Tariff points: 80/80
Agriculture
Bridgend College
HND · 2 Years · Full-time · Bridgend · 2024-2025
Tariff points: 48/48
Horticulture
College of Agriculture, Food and Rural Enterprise
FdSc · 2 Years · Full-time · Antrim · 2024-2025
Tariff points: 48/48
Horticulture
University of the Highlands and Islands (UHI)
HNC · 1 Year · Full-time · Elgin · 2024-2025
Tariff points: 21/24
Agriculture
University Centre Myerscough
BSc (Hons) · 3 Years · Full-time · Preston · 2024-2025
Tariff points: 104/104
Agriculture
Newcastle University
BSc (Hons) · 3 Years · Full-time · Newcastle upon Tyne · 2024-2025
Tariff points: 128/152
Agriculture
University of Nottingham
BSc (Hons) · 3 Years · Full-time · Loughborough · 2024-2025
Tariff points: 96/135
Agriculture
NPTC Group
HND · 2 Years · Full-time · Newtown · 2024-2025
Tariff points: N/A
Explore other Subject guides
See all
Accounting and finance
Aeronautical and aerospace engineering
Anthropology
Archaeology
Architecture and planning
Art
Biology
Biomedical sciences
Building and construction
Business and management studies
Chemical engineering
Chemistry
Civil engineering
Classics
Computer games and animation
Computer science
Criminology
Dance
Dentistry
Drama
Economics
Education
Electrical and electronic engineering
Engineering and technology
English language
English literature and creative writing
Environmental and earth sciences
Events management
Fashion, textiles and jewellery
Film studies
Finance
Food science and nutrition
Forensic science
Geography
Geology
Graphic design
Health
History
History of art
Hospitality, leisure, and tourism
Journalism
Languages
Law
Manufacturing engineering
Marketing
Materials science and engineering
Maths
Mechanical engineering
Media studies
Medicine
Midwifery
Molecular biology, biophysics, and biochemistry
Music
Nursing
Optometry
Paramedic science
Pharmacy, pharmacology, and toxicology
Philosophy
Physics and astronomy
Physiology, physiotherapy, and pathology
Policing
Politics
Psychology
Publishing, media, and information management
Radiography and medical technology
Religion and theology
Social work, childhood and youth studies
Sociology
Software engineering
Sport
Teaching and education
Veterinary science
Zoology
Sponsored articles
How to find a job
UCAS article
Top ten student money tips
UCAS article
Five reasons to sign up to the UCAS newsletter
UCAS article
Contact us
TikTok Instagram YouTube LinkedIn Facebook Twitter
Advisers
Providers
Businesses
Employers
About us
Join our team
Accessibility
Our data and analysis
Glossary
Terms and conditions
Privacy and cookies
Modern slavery statement
© UCAS 2024