Skip to content
About
Programs
Locations
Admission & Tuition
Apply
Brochure
Contact
Inspiring today's children to succeed in tomorrow's world.
*The 2024-2025 Preschool Application is Open.
Apply Today
NY Preschool has been accredited by the National Association for the Education of Young Children and is a New York UPK/Pre-K (New York City Universal Pre-Kindergarten) provider at select locations.
Our Philosophy
Instilling a love for school and learning is at the heart of all of our NY Preschool programs. We believe in providing a safe, structured, inclusive setting that supports, encourages and inspires each child. Our fundamental belief that children learn best through meaningful play is reflected in a child-centered program that integrates the cognitive, social, physical, emotional, language, self-help and aesthetic areas for the total development of the child.
Learn More
A community of learners
Our Approach
Our unique learning environment sparks physical growth and discovery while our creative curriculum, which combines the traditional and the progressive, supports each student’s social, emotional, physical and cognitive growth.
Our interactive Preschool Prep curriculum is an independent participation program that meets twice weekly and is designed to nourish the cognitive, social, emotional and physical development of children aged 18-23 months.
Preschool Prep Program »
Our 2s program meets 2, 3 or 5 days per week for 3 hours per day and incorporates art, gym and music with a focus on sensory and social development.
2s Program »
Our 3s program is a 2-, 3-, or 5-day-per-week, three-hour-per-day learning experience. The innovative curriculum of this program employs interactive literacy and thematic learning experiences that strengthen social, intellectual and physical skills in every child through language, math, science, social studies, gymnastics, dance and art lessons.
3s Program »
Our 4s program is a 5-day-per-week, 5- or 6-hour-per-day program that supports each student as he or she develops confidence in learning. Our classes are taught in a fun, caring, nurturing, positive and clean environment. Our innovative curriculum builds beyond the fundamentals as teachers encourage interactive literacy and thematic learning experiences that strengthen social, intellectual learning through physical science, social studies, gymnastics, dance and art.
4s Program »
“The teachers are fantastic, as is the strong sense of community at NY Preschool. We also love the weekly newsletters that really help us talk with our daughter about school.”
Melanie B.
W. 89th Street
NY Preschool has been accredited by the National Association for the Education of Young Children.
About
History
Philosophy
Brochure
Programs
Preschool Prep
2s
3s
4s
Admission
Process
Tuition
Contact
Schedule a Tour
Locations
Careers
Privacy
Locations
3rd Avenue
22nd St.
67th St
68th St
89th St
94th Street
Battery Park
Brooklyn Heights
Cobble Hill
Court Square
Dumbo
Greenwich Village
Long Island City
Park Slope
Sutton Place
Tribeca
West End
Subscribe
Email Sign Up
Copyright © 2023 NY Preschool. All rights reserved.
You're Invited: NY Preschool Virtual Open House
Join our 2024-2025 NY Preschool Virtual Open House and take an inside look at our
2s and 3s preschool programs with our dedicated education team.
Explore our engaging and immersive curriculum and teaching philosophy!
Tuesday, February 27th, 2024 | 7:30 p.m.
Tuesday, March 12th, 2024 | 7:30 p.m.
RSVP HERE