Select location Shop November 18, 2019 How much sunlight do plants really need? Sunlight is as important to the health of your plants as the soil and water. Identify the signs of too little and too much sun, and what do to about it. Photosynthesis Every plant needs light to grow and flourish. Plants use light to perform a vital process known as photosynthesis, whereby they turn light into sugars. Therefore the more light a plant is exposed to, the more energy it will create and the faster it will grow! Quantity of light You will often read that a particular species of plant prefers a certain amount of light. Often plants producing fruits, vegetables and flowers require more light. These plants may struggle if they are not receiving enough light. Indoors Versus Outside Outdoor plants receive much more sunlight than indoor plants. Even the heaviest outdoor shade provides more light than the sunniest indoor window. When a plant is indoors, light is usually coming from one source, such as a window. Too little or too much sun As you walk through your garden, you can perform a visual check on the condition of your plants. If your plants are drying out, burnt, faded or drooping, they may be receiving too much sun. On the flip side, if your plants are growing sparsely, have lanky and spindly branches, fewer flowers or flower buds falling off, they may not be receiving enough sun. Just the right amount of sun Optimising your plant’s sunlight is very important. Some simple ways to tell if your plants are getting enough sun include vibrant leaf colour and plant lean. Healthy thriving plants have dark green leaves. Leaning is a side effect of the plant’s search for light. Ways to improve sun exposure in your garden There are a few ways you can enhance a garden that is lacking enough sunlight. First, if you have any large trees in your garden blocking sunlight from other plants, you may need to have the crown of your tree thinned to improve the health of the rest of your plants. Secondly, paint any fences and buildings surrounding your garden white to maximise light reflection. Finally, if you plant your garden in rows from north to south, it can help improve the overall sun exposure. Other great resources https://farmityourself.com/how-much-sunlight-do-plants-need https://www.thesill.com/blogs/the-basics/lighten-up https://www.dummies.com/home-garden/gardening/flower-gardening/how-much-light-do-plants-need Recent Posts 22, Jan, 2024 Unlock the Secrets of Edible Bush Tucker Plants: Get More Garden Bang for your Plant Buck Welcome to a journey through Victoria’s backyard bounty – edible... 29, Dec, 2023 Edible Beauties: Exploring Bush Tucker Plants with Ornamental Flair At Diaco’s Garden Nursery, we have always cherished the simple... 18, Dec, 2023 The Top 9 Bush Tucker Plants for Your Melbourne Garden Oasis Welcome to the vibrant world of bush tucker plants at... Customer Service About Us Loyalty Membership Trade Nursery Membership Frequently Asked Questions Shop Online Plants My Account Returns Policy Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy Contact Entry Employment Quote Request Contact Us Gardening Advice Unlock the Secrets of Edible Bush Tucker Plants: Get More Garden Bang for your Plant Buck Edible Beauties: Exploring Bush Tucker Plants with Ornamental Flair The Top 9 Bush Tucker Plants for Your Melbourne Garden Oasis Bush Tucker Plants For Beginners: A Gardener’s Guide in Victoria Unveiling the Serene Beauty of Asian Gardens: A Journey into Tranquility Diaco’s Garden Nursery © 2021 | Powered by Jaffle