Magazine Newsletter Sweepstakes BOOK NOW TRIP IDEAS DESTINATIONS WORLD'S BEST TIPS + PLANNING CRUISES TRAVEL PRODUCTS NEWS ABOUT US SUBSCRIBE AIRLINES + AIRPORTS 20 Tips First-time Fliers Need to Know Whether you're flying domestically or internationally, here's how to make your first flight more enjoyable. By Melissa Locker Updated on January 24, 2024 PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES Congratulations, you’ve booked your first flight! Pat yourself on the back, because there are only a few more steps between you and a seamless flying experience. If you’re like most people, exploring something new — like the cabin of an airplane — can be daunting. While not every first-time flier will mistake the emergency exit for the bathroom, there are some common errors newbie travelers frequently make. To help you have a smooth and stress-free journey, we've compiled 20 tips first-time fliers should know. Book a specific seat. If you prefer aisles or windows to middle seats, be sure to choose your seat early. Select your preferred option when booking your ticket or log onto the airline’s website before your flight. Many airlines list the airplane model on their ticketing page, but you can also use a third-party site like SeatGuru to view seat maps. Don’t see a spot you love? Sign up with the website ExpertFlyer, which alerts you when your seat of choice frees up and is available to book. 3 Easy Ways to Get a Better Seat on a Plane, According to an Aviation Expert Download your airline's app. Skip the long lines at the airport by using your airline's app to check in, grab your boarding pass, and head straight to security. You can also use the app to check your flight status, including delays, cancellations, or gate changes in real time. Many airlines let passengers access in-flight entertainment through their app, so download it in advance if you want to watch movies on your own device. Buy travel insurance. Even if you plan everything perfectly, things can go wrong when you travel, from flight delays to lost luggage. Travel insurance can compensate you for some of these expenses and, at the very least, provide you with peace of mind. Whether you're looking to purchase flight insurance or a comprehensive plan that covers medical expenses like emergency evacuation, plenty of options are available. Some credit cards offer some degree of protection, such as lost baggage or flight cancellation insurance, so it's worth checking your perks before your trip. How to Pick the Best Flight Insurance Policy for Your Next Trip Pack light. The general rule when you pack for a trip is that you don’t need as much as you think you do. Traveling with only a carry-on can save you time at the airport and help you avoid the hassle of lost luggage, but you'll want to pack efficiently to maximize space. We've got a handy-dandy carry-on packing list to make sure you don’t overthink it. Make sure your carry-on is the right size. Domestic and international travel each have a different set of rules when it comes to carry-on bag sizes. Before you head to the airport with your carefully packed bag, check your airline’s carry-on size restrictions and if you have an additional tote, make sure it qualifies as a personal item. Avoid packing large liquids in your carry-on. If you’re not checking a bag, remember that carry-on liquids, gels, and aerosols have to be 3.4 fluid ounces or less and fit in a clear, quart-size bag. We recommend using a TSA-approved toiletry bottle set to transport your shampoo, conditioner, and other liquids without any issues. Check your passport expiration date. There is nothing quite like the panic that comes from booking a spontaneous vacation and realizing your passport is expired — or not realizing that you need a passport to visit Canada or Mexico. Adding to the challenge is that some countries won’t allow you to visit within six months of your passport’s expiration date in case you take an extra-long vacation. In short, it never hurts to check your passport’s expiration date and, if necessary, renew it before your next big trip. Also, if you're flying domestically, make sure your state-issued ID is valid for travel per TSA's identification rules. Review your itinerary. Traveling between time zones or around the world can be confusing. That’s why it always pays to take a tip from Santa Claus and make a list and check it twice. Go through your itinerary, confirm your airport (Did you book Heathrow or Gatwick? JFK or Newark?), your connection times (How long does it take to get to the train station? Which time zone is that?), and your plane tickets, including whether or not your name is spelled correctly on your documents. While you’re working your way through the list, confirm your reservations for everything from hotels, flights, trains, buses, and tour groups. Arrive at the airport early. Most airlines recommend arriving at the airport three hours before an international flight or two hours before a domestic flight. If you're a first-time flier, give yourself extra time, especially if you’re flying during the holidays, traveling with kids, or checking bags. You can speed up the process by checking in online, booking a business class ticket with priority check-in privileges, flying with a carry-on only, or signing up for TSA PreCheck or Clear, which allows you to get through security faster. Figure out your phone plan. If you're flying out of the country, contact your service provider in advance to buy data roaming and an international calling plan. If you do not want to use your phone while traveling abroad but have it with you, shut off the data roaming on your device or risk a hefty phone bill. Download travel apps before your trip and use them when you’re on the hotel’s Wi-Fi or purchase a local SIM card so you text, call, and use data while abroad. Be respectful of your fellow passengers. Plane cabins are cramped spaces, so it's important to be mindful of how your actions impact the people around you. There are several unwritten rules of airplane etiquette, such as wearing headphones while listening to audio, avoiding smelly food and fragrances, and sticking to your assigned seat. Most of these are common sense, but it's a good idea to review some of the unspoken rules of air travel, especially if it's your first time flying. Adjust to your new time zone as soon as possible. If you're traveling across time zones, you'll likely experience jet lag. To quickly recover, get a head start on resetting your body's internal clock by adapting to your new time zone during the flight (or even a few days before you depart). On a long-haul flight, set your watch or phone's clock to the new time zone so you can sleep when it's nighttime in your destination and arrive feeling relatively refreshed. Plane cabins are notoriously dry environments, so staying hydrated and avoiding caffeine and alcohol while in the air can help you mitigate the effects of being at a high altitude. Don't exchange too much money before you travel. It’s a good idea to have some of the local currency on hand when you land, but don’t overdo it. Too much cash invites disaster if it’s stolen or lost. Figure out your budget and grab some cash at your bank or an airport ATM. If you do run out of cash, it’s easy to withdraw more at a local bank or ATM in most countries. Alert your bank of your vacation plans. There are few things more frustrating than having your credit card frozen when you’re on vacation because your bank thinks your card has been stolen. While most banks are now sophisticated enough to know when you're traveling based on your recent purchases (e.g., flights, hotel reservations, etc.), you may want to notify your credit card company’s fraud department that you’re leaving the country just in case. While you’re on the phone with your credit card company, ask them to send you a credit card with a chip in it (if you don’t already have one). While most places can still swipe your card’s magnetic strip, many countries are relying on chip technology for things like train ticket machines, gas stations, and food purchases. Having a chip card option can make your life easier when you travel. Bring backup entertainment. Most airlines offer free onboard entertainment, including movies and TV shows you can watch on a seatback screen or your personal device. Some carriers have limited options, so it's a good idea to check your aircraft's amenities while booking your ticket. In any case, it's wise to bring a book, laptop, or tablet you can use in case the in-flight entertainment system isn't available. Make sure you pack your charger or a portable power bank in your carry-on and bring your own headphones for better sound quality. Wear comfortable clothing. Whether you're taking a red-eye or a shorter domestic flight, you'll want to dress comfortably for the journey. Opt for loose-fitting, breathable clothing, including an extra layer in case you get cold on the plane, as well as shoes you can easily slip on and off while going through security. Vacation is not the time to break in a new pair of kicks, so make sure you wear a tried-and-true comfy pair to the airport. What to Wear on a Plane Bring your own snacks. Don’t wait until you get to the airport to buy snacks for your flight. The restaurants and stores after security are notoriously pricey and often have limited options. Instead, pack your favorite nibbles that comply with the TSA’s rules. Stick to solid food items that don’t require refrigeration, such as protein bars or dried fruit and nuts. Schedule a recovery day. Many of us have limited vacation days, meaning we have to cram a lot of sightseeing, culture, food, and relaxation into an incredibly short time span. While you might be tempted to hit the ground running as soon as you land, scheduling some downtime after your flight can help you fully recover from any fatigue or jet lag. The same goes for the flight home — if you can, take a day off to relax and unpack before diving back into your usual routine, or you might end up needing a vacation from your vacation. Use credit cards for purchases. Back in the day, travel lore was to stick to cold hard cash (or traveler’s checks) while abroad. These days, the best exchange rates are often found using your credit card. When the sales clerk asks if you want the charge in dollars or the local currency, always opt for the local money as you’ll usually end up with a better rate. That said, check whether your credit card charges foreign transaction fees and, if it does, apply for a new one before your trip. Chase Sapphire Preferred card and Platinum American Express are just two options that don't charge these fees. Don't panic if things go wrong. Follow Douglas Adams' advice from The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy: “The most important thing a traveler needs to remember whether making their way through time and space or simply to Cleveland is this: Don’t Panic.” Things happen both at home and on the road and while missed connections, lost train tickets, or disappearing hotel reservations can be incredibly frustrating, panicking helps nothing. Stay organized and keep a cool head. By the end of the trip, you’ll probably have a great story to tell. Updated by Julia Eskins Was this page helpful? Related Articles 25 Things You Should Do Before Boarding a Plane, According to a Frequent Flier You Might Be Entitled to Compensation If Your Bag Is Delayed — What to Know The Ultimate International Trip Packing List The 16 Best Travel Safety Products of 2024 15 Holiday Travel Tips for a Less Stressful Festive Season Why You Should Get Global Entry and How It's Different From TSA PreCheck 8 Tips to Help You Avoid Baggage Fees Next Time You Fly Here's How Long It Takes to Renew a Passport How to Move to Another Country — 15 Key Steps Why You Should Never Share Photos of Your Boarding Pass on Social Media Here’s