Discoveries Responsible Travel Podcast About Contact 12 Essential Sustainable Tourism Tips By Erin Hynes Last Updated on August 24, 2023 These 12 essential sustainable tourism tips will help you create a positive impact while traveling. There are a lot of similarities between the terms we see used to describe environmentally friendly travel. There’s eco travel and eco tourism, and there’s zero waste travel, and there’s also green travel. I like to use the term sustainable travel because it does a good job of expanding the concept of sustainability beyond just environmental issues. Table of Contents What is Sustainable Tourism? Sustainable tourism is a model for ensuring that nature, culture and history is preserved. This is becoming increasingly important with more and more tourists traveling every year. With sustainable tourism, we can take full account of the current and future economic, social and environmental impacts of travel. And, address the needs of visitors, the industry, the environment and host communities. Sustainable tourism is important, because with a sustainable approach to tourism, we can reduce the effects of overtourism, support local and Indigenous communities, protect natural resources and wildlife, and become a more responsible traveler. When talking about sustainability, I think it is important to remember that around the globe, sustainability might look different. Sustainable solutions we are pursuing here in Canada, for example, might not make sense in other countries. For example, here in Canada we have lots of access to foods that support vegan and vegetarian diets – but that isn’t the case all over the globe. While traveling, I think it’s important to keep this in mind and be empathetic to diversified approaches to sustainability. It is always up to a local community to decide what is best for them: their culture, nature, wildlife and more. 12 Sustainable Tourism Tips Are you ready to become a more sustainable tourist? Read on for 12 essential sustainable tourism tips! 1. Minimize flying as much as possible. Flights add a significant amount of planet-warming gases to the atmosphere. For example, taking one return flight can generate more CO2 than citizens of some countries produce in an entire year, which means your carbon footprint goes up exponentially every time you fly. Air travel is so destructive, that some people actually opt to quit flying entirely. I interviewed sustainable travel blogger Evelina Utterdahl about her choice to quit flying, and the #nofly movement that has started in Sweden. You can listen to that interview right here! Of course, for many of us it is not realistic to cut out flying entirely. Some of us may have family abroad, or be required to fly for work. If you live in a country like Canada or Australia, visiting another country might not be possible without a flight (or a multi day road trip). Immigrants must fly to visit home, and some refugees rely on flights to escape conflict zones. Our best approach to sustainable tourism when it comes to flying, is to reduce how much we fly, as much as possible. Instead of booking a quick, short haul flight to get us from Laos to Thailand, we spent two days traveling by Laotian slow boat. Here are some ways that you can reduce your air travel carbon footprint: Most emissions are released during takeoff and landing. You can reduce the carbon impact of your flight by booking a direct flight rather than a flight that includes connections. The less you takeoff and land, the better! Travel overland rather than booking a flight, particularly when traveling short distances. In some cases, flights are a big time saver, or they’re getting you across an ocean. But wherever possible, take that train (or bus!) instead of the plane! Fly economy class. Business class fliers leave a far larger carbon footprint, so by opting for economy you can minimize your impact when you do fly. You can also neutralize your carbon footprint by paying carbon offsets. This means funding projects that remove carbon emissions like reforestation, farm power and landfill gas capture. Make it a practice to donate, every time you fly. 2. Travel slowly for sustainable tourism. Rather than hopping from one place or city to another every 1 to 3 days, spend as long as possible in a place. Spending more time in a place enables tourists to better connect with the destinations they visit. Staying longer means you can get to know the culture and people better. Tourists can invest more of their dollars in that region, which benefits the local community and economy. And, traveling slowly has environmental benefits – it results in less overland and air travel, which means less CO2 emissions. We spent 2 months traveling India, usually spending up to a week in each place. It was relaxing (and enriching!) to travel at this slower pace. 3. Pack zero waste and reusable products. The goal of a zero waste product is to reduce the amount of waste that goes to landfills. As more and more zero waste products become available, zero waste is becoming an accessible way to reduce your environmental impact. In recent years, I’ve introduced zero waste products into my life at home, but also into my travel habits. These are my favorite zero waste items to bring traveling, that help with sustainable tourism: Canvas bags, reusable cutlery, and reusable food storage containers. By bringing these items along, I can refuse single use items that I might come across while shopping or dining out. I have canvas bags to use instead of accepting plastic bags, and reusable cutlery for takeout. I like to bring some containers for random things, like leftover food I might like to save. Zero waste toiletries. I have always been all about the basics when it comes to toiletries. When traveling, I bring a no waste shampoo bar (I like the ones from Lush!), toothpaste tablets (I love the ones from Canadian company Oxygenate!), and a bamboo toothbrush. One thing to note? Zero waste offers us a holistic solution to the problem of waste that we as individuals produce. But, the problem of waste going to landfills is much bigger than individuals, it has a lot to do with manufacturing. I keep my toothpaste tablets in a small jar, and always bring a bamboo toothbrush! 4. Bring a water filtration system. The first time I traveled across India I bought tons of bottled water because it was the simplest way to access safe drinking water. Over the course of that trip an immense amount of plastic was tossed out – just from water bottles. I was cognizant of it because while at home, I never buy bottled water. Instead, I always carry a small reusable bottle that I can refill in water taps throughout my day. After that trip, I decided it was time to give up bottled water while traveling, too. The solution? A portable water filtration system. Filtering your own water is a sustainable tourism practice because it will reduce how much plastic waste you generate. There are tons of systems to choose from that suit different needs, but all systems have the same function: they filter contaminants out of water, making it safe to drink. There are tons of options to choose from, Lifestraw is a popular one, especially for hiking and camping. After comparing options, I opted for Grayl. My Grayl water bottle. Grayl bottles come in two parts: A cup and a filter. To make water safe to drink, you’ll remove the filter and fill the cup with water from anywhere: a river, a lake, a tap, even rainwater. Once the cup is filled, you insert the fitted filter and slowly push it down. As you push the filter down into the cup, the water is filtered through. Pathogens, chemicals, and heavy metals are removed, and in as little as 15 seconds, tada! Safe drinking water. So far, I’ve used my Grayl bottle for camping trips around Ontario – like to Algonquin Park and Point Pelee National Park. As soon as it’s safe to travel internationally again (post pandemic!) I will be bringing this bottle along to filter all my water – specifically when I travel to countries that don’t have safe tap water. Collecting rain water to filter in my Grayl bottle, in Algonquin Provincial Park. 5. Support and shop at local businesses. One of the most important sustainable tourism tips is to support local people and their communities by investing your dollars in them rather than the corporate companies. This sustainable tourism practice means skipping the Starbucks and opting for a local cafe instead! By putting your dollars towards local hotels, restaurants, cafes, and other businesses, you can help ensure that the locals in the place you are visiting are directly benefiting from tourism. This helps keep tourism sustainable for a community long term. A few ways to support local communities include buying directly from markets and artisan shops, eating in small restaurants, selecting locally owned and operated tour companies and staying in locally owned hotels and hostels. And souvenirs? Many souvenirs are imported from elsewhere. Keep an eye out for souvenirs that appear to be mass produced, and instead opt for souvenirs from local markets or artisans. If you’re ever unsure about how local a restaurant or hotel is, do a bit of research. Oftentimes online reviews will reveal who is operating or who owns the business, and that’s a great clue to whether it’s local or not. You can also look for clues on the business’s website, or simply ask! I always pick up fresh fruits from local markets like this one in Mandalay, Myanmar. 6. Support local tourism operators. Many global tour operators are actively working toward more sustainable tourism practices. There are eco-operators that take steps to minimize their environmental impact, and many tour operators are working toward hiring local guides and supporting local business as much as possible. When booking group travel or tours, do a bit of research to see what kind of support the company you’re looking at is giving to the local community. Look at whether their guides are local to the destination you’re visiting, look at whether other staff are local, and look at if they support local restaurants and hotels rather than chains. When possible, you can also choose to hire a guide once you’ve arrived at your destination. For example, when we traveled to Guatemala to do the Acatenango hike (which gives you views of an erupting volcano!) we didn’t book our guide until we’d arrived in Antigua. Rather than booking a global tour company for our hike, we asked in our hostel to be connected with a local guide. Bagan, Myanmar is know for it’s beautiful ancient temples. But by hiring a local guide we were able to learn more about the surrounding region. 7. Practice responsible wildlife tourism. Sustainable tourism means protecting all aspects of a community and environment, including their wildlife. Observing wildlife while traveling is very rewarding, but to do it responsibly you’ll want to stick to observational experiences only. When a tour, safari, or sanctuary allows you to interact with wildlife, it’s important to remember that you’re interacting with an animal that has been trained to interact with you. It’s a bad sign if you’re allowed to touch, ride, or hold a wild animal. Instead, opt for tours and experiences that are observation-based and don’t disturb any wildlife. Seeing wildlife this way is truly magical, because you get to see beautiful animals as they are in their natural habitat. The best line of defence when it comes to wildlife tourism is to always do your research, and do it really well. For example, if there’s an elephant sanctuary you want to visit, look at whether or not they allow visitors to touch, feed, or ride the elephants. You can also look at reviews for that sanctuary to learn what other tourists have seen there. If they’ve witnessed maltreatment, it’ll likely be mentioned in the review. For more on responsible wildlife tourism, read Your Guide to Responsible Wildlife Tourism 8. Eat as the locals do. My severe food allergies often means I can’t safely eat local foods when I travel, and this always disappoints me. Trying local cuisine is such an exciting part