My Account Home / Travel Tips / Theft & Scams / Travel with a Money Belt About Rick Explore Europe Our Tours Travel Tips Trains & Rail Passes Trip Planning Transportation Money Phones & Tech Packing Light Sleeping & Eating Health & Hygiene Sightseeing & Activities Theft & Scams Travel Classes Watch, Read, Listen Travel Forum Shop Online Travel with a Money Belt: Your Portable Safe To thwart pickpockets, stash your valuables in your money belt, then tuck it inside your clothes. By Rick Steves More secure than a travel wallet, money belts are your key to peace of mind. I never travel without one. A money belt is a small, zippered fabric pouch that fastens around the waist under your pants or skirt. You wear it completely hidden from sight, tucked in like a shirttail — over your undies, under your pants or skirt. You can wear the pouch over your stomach for ease of access or slide it around to the small of your back. Some people prefer to use a neck pouch, worn like a necklace but under a shirt; or a hidden pocket, which loops onto your belt, then tucks in behind it. Others use a growing range of specialty travel clothes — from blazers to yoga pants to scarves — with hidden pockets. With a money belt or similar hidden, fastened storage, all your essentials are on you as securely and thoughtlessly as your underwear. Have you ever thought about that? Every morning you put on your underpants. You don't even think about them all day long. And every night, when you undress, sure enough, there they are, exactly where you put them. When I travel, my valuables are just as securely out of sight and out of mind, around my waist in a money belt. It's luxurious peace of mind. I'm uncomfortable only when I'm not wearing it. But money belts don't work if you don't wear them properly. I once met an American woman whose purse was stolen, and in her purse was her money belt (that juicy little anecdote was featured in every street-thief newsletter). If you pull out your money belt to retrieve something, remember to tuck it back in. And don't use a fanny pack as a money belt — thieves assume this is where you keep your goodies. Never leave your phone or money belt "hidden" on the beach while you swim. Ideally, leave them locked up in your room; if that's not an option, bring a small waterproof pouch or dry bag so your valuables can swim with you. In hostels or on overnight trains, wear your valuables when you sleep or store them safely in a locker. You can even shower with your valuables in a hostel (hang them in a waterproof bag from the nozzle or curtain rod). Keep your money-belt contents dry and sweat-free by slipping them into a plastic sheath or baggie before zipping them into the belt. You don't need to get at your money belt for every euro. Your money belt is your deep storage — for select deposits and withdrawals. For convenience, carry a day's spending money in your pocket (a zipper, button-down flap, or Velcro strip sewn into your front or back pocket slows down fast fingers). Make sure it's an amount you're prepared to lose. I usually don't even carry a wallet. A few bills in my shirt pocket — no keys, no wallet — I'm on vacation! Related articles Outsmarting Pickpockets and Thieves Losing It All...and Bouncing Back Bank Card Safety Tips for Travelers Tour of a Money Belt Packing light applies to your money belt as well as your luggage. Here's what to keep in it: Passport: The item you least want to lose en route Driver's license: Necessary if you want to rent a car, and useful as collateral for rentals (bikes, audioguides, and so on) Cards: Debit and credit cards Cash: Backup stash and larger bills Plastic sheath: Protective cover (a plastic baggie works) for keeping money-belt contents dry About Us Contact Information What We Do Class Calendar Meet the Staff Social Responsibility Climate Smart Jobs Travel Help FAQ Tour & Covid FAQ Ask Us Visit the Travel Center Guidebook Updates Submit Book Feedback Publications Travel News Email Tour News Email Tour Catalog Subscription Center Media Partners TV Programmers Radio Programmers Syndicated Content Press Room Contact Us email phone map Follow Us Facebook YouTube Twitter Pinterest Instagram ©2024 Rick Steves' Europe, Inc. | CST# 2086743 | Terms of Service | Privacy