Magazine Newsletter Sweepstakes BOOK NOW TRIP IDEAS DESTINATIONS WORLD'S BEST TIPS + PLANNING CRUISES TRAVEL PRODUCTS NEWS ABOUT US SUBSCRIBE TRIP IDEAS ROMANTIC GETAWAYS This Is How Long New Couples Should Wait Before Going on Vacation Together, According to Therapists We asked therapists for their best advice for couples traveling together for the first time. By Lauren Dana Ellman Published on January 19, 2024 PHOTO: EDWIN TAN/GETTY IMAGES Entering a new relationship is undoubtedly exciting — bring on the butterflies, the honeymoon phase, and the lovey-dovey texts. With the sparks flying high in the first few weeks and months of your courtship, you’ll likely want to spend every waking hour together. In fact, you may even be thinking about embarking on a romantic getaway with your sweetheart. Michelle Herzog, licensed therapist and dating expert, told Travel + Leisure, “Taking a trip together can be a great measure [of] the future health of the couple — how you handle stressful situations, not having full privacy, and how you generally travel [will all be] on display.” With all this in mind, you may be wondering when exactly you should take your first couples trip. Ultimately, explains Herzog, this will vary from couple to couple since it depends on your — and your partner’s — comfort levels. That said, in her experience as a couples therapist, “a lot of folks report feeling comfortable and confident in their relationship around the six-month mark.” Similarly, Omar Ruiz, licensed marriage and family therapist, recommends bringing up the prospect of a romantic trip three months into the relationship, which “would give them enough time to plan out their trip by months six to seven.” Below, find expert-approved tips for a successful first trip as a couple. MEET THE EXPERT Michelle Herzog is a licensed relationship and sex therapist and dating expert. Omar Ruiz is a licensed marriage and family therapist with over 13 years of marriage counseling experience. Annalise Oatman is a licensed clinical social worker and founder of Deeper Well Therapy. GETTY IMAGES Communication is key. Clear and open communication is key when planning a trip with anyone, including your new partner. You’ll need to discuss all aspects of the vacation planning process, from deciding where to go to finalizing reservations and booking activities. Herzog encourages couples to check in with each other throughout the trip, too. Below are three Herzog-approved prompts to “help get you on a positive path of communication” as you begin planning your romantic getaway. What kind of experience do you want to have together? What are 1-2 things you would like to do on this trip? How much money would you like to budget for this trip? Get candid about finances. It’s crucial to be upfront with your partner about your financial commitment to this trip. To avoid potential disagreements and points of contention on the trip, sit down with your partner to iron out the fine print and discuss exactly how you will split costs and establish a budget. For example, will you split everything 50-50? Will one of you pay for flights while the other shells out the money for lodging? Will you take turns paying for meals? These are important things to talk about early in the planning process. Related: The Best Weekend Getaways for Couples Be flexible. According to Herzog, “Practicing flexibility can make or break your trip experience,” considering how stressful travel can be in a new environment with a new partner. Thus, she recommends being as flexible as possible — both on vacation and in the relationship in general. “This means leaning on compromise, communicating openly, and checking in throughout your trip to ensure you’re both getting what you want” out of the vacation, says Herzog. GETTY IMAGES Understand each other’s travel style. Annalise Oatman, licensed clinical social worker, advises “figur[ing] out in advance if one of you is more of a planner than the other.” It’s also possible that both individuals are planners — or neither. While there is no right or wrong answer, she explains that “understanding each other's approaches to stretches of ‘free time’ can set you up to approach your vacation time together in a way that supports everyone's needs and personality style.” For example, if one of you is a planner and the other prefers spontaneity, Oatman recommends having a plan for “there to be some structure to the trip (enough to quell the anxiety of the planner)” along with “some open, flexible time” for the other person. Besides, like relationships, vacations themselves are all about balance. Have a plan to manage your own stress and anxiety. Oatman tells T+L that it’s a good idea to “have a plan for managing your own stress and anxiety during the trip, should it arise (and it probably will at some point).” Start by considering what stress-relief tactics have worked for you in the past, and think about ways in which you may incorporate them. Per the pro, you may consider yoga, meditation, massages, and time just for yourself. Related: 7 Travel Anxiety Tips to Ease Stress, According to a Psychiatrist And come up with a plan to support your partner, too. “Sometimes,” says Ruiz, “there are events, situations, or interactions that may occur during a trip that can cause someone to struggle with an immense amount of stress,” such as flight delays and lost luggage, which, unfortunately, are all too common nowadays. With that in mind, Ruiz tells T+L that "It's best to make sure the couple comes up with a plan on how they can best support their partner in the event things don't go as planned. This will help lessen the risk that this trip becomes the couple's last.” “Remember, this is a big first step for both of you,” says Herzog. “There may be some nervousness going into an adventure like this, so practicing empathy and [checking] in with each other is important.” Was this page helpful? Related Articles 25 Best Vacation Spots for Couples How to Plan the Perfect Hawaii Honeymoon, According to Experts What Every Grandparent Should Know Before Traveling With Their Grandchildren (Video) The Most Romantic Cruises to Book Now 9 Mistakes That Could Ruin Your Romantic Couples' Trip I Became a Certified Scuba Diver on Vacation — Here's How These Delta Pilots Have Been Married for 10 Years — Here Are Their Secrets to Traveling As a Couple 51 Most Romantic Places in the U.S. Good News From Around the World to Make You Smile During Quarantine The 11 Best Products for Flight Anxiety of 2024, According to a Mental Health Professional 20 Romantic Anniversary Trip Ideas I Went on a Zambian Safari During COVID-19 — Here's What It Was Like Here's What You Need to Know Before Becoming a Disney Travel Agent 50 Romantic Quotes About Travel and Love to Inspire Your Next Adventure Looking Back at LGBTQIA+ Travel Stories: Season 2, Episode 7 of 'Let's Go Together' 7 Best Ski Trips for Couples NEWSLETTER Follow Us TRIP IDEAS TRAVEL TIPS TRAVEL GUIDES WORLD'S BEST AWARDS TRAVEL PRODUCTS HOTELS + RESORTS AIRLINES + AIRPORTS NEWS CRUISES Subscribe Privacy Policy About Us Terms of Service Advertise Careers EU Privacy Travel + Leisure Wine Travel + Leisure is published by Meredith Corporation under license from Travel + Leisure Co. Copyright 2022 Travel + Leisure Co. All Rights Reserved. TRAVEL + LEISURE is a registered trademark of Travel + Leisure Co., registered in the United States and other countries. Travel + Leisure magazine may receive compensation for some links to products and services on this website. Offers may be subject to change without notice. Travel + Leisure is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family. Please review our updated Terms of Service.