SHOWS FOOD TRAVEL HEALTH CULTURE STYLE & BEAUTY HOMES UNLIMIT AWARDS 2024 LOGIN Home Travel 7 Easy Tips To Choose The Right Hotel For Your Holiday 7 Easy Tips To Choose The Right Hotel For Your Holiday The right accommodation can make or break your stay. Bookmark this right away. Vernika Awal Published On May 24, 2022 | Updated On Mar 07, 2024 Travelling for most is like therapy—to take a small break from the monotony of the routine and just switch off for a bit and explore a destination in a manner that suits one best. Some might like to tick all the checkboxes of a tourist destination, while there are some for whom their hotel or homestay itself is a complete destination. I fall in the category of travellers for whom their hotel stay can be a make or break point for a holiday. So here are some tips on how to pick the right hotel or homestay for your next vacation. 1. Book in advance during peak season If you have to align your holidays with the summer vacations of your children, which usually sparks the peak holiday season across the country for most tourist destinations, then plan in advance—as soon as you get the school schedule at the beginning of an academic year. Most travel aggregator websites allow you to book months in advance without any prepayment. This ensures an early bird discount and you also score a room before they are all sold out. Travelling Through Time In Ruskin Bond’s Towns 2. Check the hotel’s location from the main destination Are you someone who likes to stay in the middle of all the action or someone who prefers to stay away from the bustle? Accordingly, check the hotel’s location before booking a room as it might come in handy. A central location ensures that most tourist spots are nearby and if you’re travelling with limited days in hand then this might be the best option. 3. Read hotel reviews to find things beyond the fine print Many times you’ll be taken in by the beautifully curated and staged photos of the property but might find that the reality is far from it when you reach there. To avoid such disappointments, always read extensive property reviews and see photos clicked by the travellers to know what the hotel actually has to offer. 10 Destinations For The Greatest Of All Travels In 2022 4. Check if the breakfast is inclusive in the stay Most hotels usually offer a complimentary breakfast with room bookings, but this is not the norm. When booking through websites, travel aggregator sites, or a travel agent, always check if the breakfast is included in the price. Trust me, breakfast is one of the best meals that you’d eat in a hotel and it also ensures that you’ve had your fill before you head out for the day to explore the destination. 5. If it’s a homestay, be sure to check about the host Homestay aggregators do not allow you to see the exact location of a homestay before you book, but they always have a section about the owner; reading that might help you as a good owner can make your stay even more delightful with his attitude and knowledge about the destination. Also, read the reviews left by fellow travellers about the property and the owner. How To Travel Alone: Top Tips From Solo Women Travellers 6. Research about the hotel’s safety measures In the wake of the pandemic, the one thing that has drawn everyone’s attention is the safety measures that hotels or homestays take to ensure their guests of utmost hygiene. Read the hotel’s safety guide on their websites or social media handles before you book a room. If still unclear, check with them by giving them a call. Ideally most hotels these days would ensure a contactless check-in and social distancing measures at their restaurants and sanitised and sealed rooms. 7. Check the hotel’s medical plan in case of an emergency While the last thing one would want during a holiday is to have an emergency situation that requires medical help, it is of utmost importance to check with the hotels prior to booking if they have a doctor on-call or a medical facility nearby in case of any emergency. Most good hotels would always have a basic first aid kit as a first response. Photo: Shutterstock Hotel Review Homestays Vacations Travel Tips Summer Holidays Comment 0 Like 0 POPULAR ON ZEST All Foods Travel Health Culture Styles-Beauty FOOD 8 Food Items To Boost Vitamin B12 In Your Diet TRAVEL 7 Hill Stations In South India To Beat The Heat HEALTH 9 Best Biotin Rich Foods For Hair Growth — Unlock Thicker, Healthier Hair! CULTURE Yoga For Sleep: Poses, Nidra & Practices For Better Sleep & Relaxation STYLE-BEAUTY 8 Affordable Korean Skincare Brands On Our Radar HOMES Best Indoor Summer Plants For Your Home Decor RELATED STORIES TRAVEL Come Along With Us On A Thrilling 3-Day Tour From Mumbai TRAVEL Discover The Best Cruise In Goa and Sail In Style TRAVEL Tips On Choosing The Best Time For A Caribbean Cruise TRAVEL 7 Trips For The Ultimate Cruise Experience For Couples In 2023 TRAVEL 10 Luxury Homestays And Villas For The Perfect Valentine’s Day Getaway RECOMMENDED FOR YOU TRAVEL Glimpses Of Parineeti Chopra's Mexican Trip To Celebrate Priyanka's Birthday TRAVEL 6 Indian Celebs Who Joined Bear Grylls On His Wild Survival Trails TRAVEL Anushka Sharma-Virat Kohli's Top 10 Travel Pics Will Make You Jealous GOAN GULLIES Spices of Goa TRAVEL Goan Gullies ZEST WATCH WEB STORIES DIGITAL COVERS PHOTO GALLERY DISCOVER ABOUT ZEEZEST ADVERTISE WITH US QUIZ TERMS OF USE SITEMAPS FEEDBACK CONTACT US STAY CONNECTED: EMAIL: zeezest@zee.com © Copyright 2024 ZeeZest - All Right Reserved