Magazine Newsletter Sweepstakes BOOK NOW TRIP IDEAS DESTINATIONS WORLD'S BEST TIPS + PLANNING CRUISES TRAVEL PRODUCTS NEWS ABOUT US SUBSCRIBE AIRLINES + AIRPORTS You Might Be Entitled to Compensation If Your Bag Is Delayed — What to Know Here's what to do if your checked luggage is delayed. By Stefanie Waldek Published on February 17, 2024 In This Article What to Do If Your Baggage Is Delayed Passenger Rights for Delayed Baggage How to Determine Compensation for Delayed Baggage Travel Insurance Coverage for Delayed Baggage Compensation How to Submit Delayed Baggage Compensation Claims Delayed Baggage Policies of Major U.S. Airlines PHOTO: IZUSEK/GETTY IMAGES There's a reason many seasoned travelers are wary of checking a bag for a flight — there's no guarantee it will show up at your destination on time, or even at all. In 2022, U.S. airlines mishandled approximately three million bags, according to the Bureau of Transportation Statistics. Granted, that's out of 470 million checked bags, which means most are handled properly. But that's no consolation if your bag is one of the delayed ones, and you're stuck on a trip without all your belongings. What might console you, however, is the knowledge that you're likely entitled to compensation for extensive baggage delays. "The average compensation from an airline for checked luggage that is either lost or damaged is $1,525 to $3,500, under U.S. and Montreal Convention air passenger rights laws," says Tomasz Pawliszyn, CEO at air passenger rights organization AirHelp. If your bag is delayed (but not permanently lost), here's what you need to know. YANGYANG/GETTY IMAGES MEET THE EXPERT Tomasz Pawliszyn is the CEO at air passenger rights organization AirHelp. Tomasz Pawliszyn What to Do If Your Baggage Is Delayed If you're standing at baggage claim and your luggage doesn't appear on the conveyor, the first step you need to take is to report your missing bag to the airline. This must be done at your final destination, not during a layover. Most airlines have a desk in the baggage claim area where you can file a Property Irregularity Report (PIR), which contains both personal information and the details of your missing bag, including its brand and color. You'll also be able to provide the airline with the address at which you're staying, so they can deliver it right to your door once found (for free). If there's no airline desk at baggage claim, contact your airline while you're still at the airport to report the missing bag. Why You Should Always Take a Photo of Your Luggage Before Checking It Passenger Rights for Delayed Baggage If your checked bag is delayed, an airline must compensate you for any reasonable expenses incurred due to the holdup. For instance, if you checked all your toiletries and need to buy new ones while your bag is missing, an airline should reimburse you for those items. Keep in mind this compensation will only be issued after you file a claim, so you will have to pay out of pocket for any essentials while your luggage is delayed. These rights are protected by law both domestically and internationally. Domestically, the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) requires airlines "to compensate passengers for reasonable, verifiable, and actual incidental expenses that they may incur while their bags are delayed — subject to the maximum liability limits," which is $3,800. Furthermore, "airlines are not allowed to set an arbitrary daily amount for interim expenses." If you're flying internationally, you're likely protected by an international treaty called the Montreal Convention, where the maximum baggage liability is approximately $1,700. "Airlines are free to pay more than the limit, but are not required to do so," per the DOT. The European Union also has its own limitations: up to approximately €1,300. PETER DAZELEY/GETTY IMAGES How to Determine Compensation for Delayed Baggage There's only one rule when it comes to the airline-issued compensation for delayed baggage: The expenses must be "reasonable." Toiletries are certainly considered reasonable expenses, though you might not be able to justify high-end products to your airline. Other essential items may include a bathing suit for a beach vacation, a suit for a business meeting, or even gear rentals for a ski trip (assuming you packed your equipment in your checked bag). But don't consider delayed baggage a chance to go on a shopping spree. While what's considered reasonable isn't specifically defined in the case of delayed baggage compensation, any items for which you're looking to be reimbursed should be easily defendable. Travel Insurance Coverage for Delayed Baggage Compensation If you have travel insurance — whether a standalone policy or what your credit card covers for purchases — you may be able to receive additional compensation for your delayed baggage beyond what an airline issues. Most policies will require you to file a claim with your airline first, as it's required to compensate you. Read the details of your specific policy to find out the amount covered for delayed baggage, as well as the process of filing a claim for reimbursement. How to Submit Delayed Baggage Compensation Claims Each airline (and insurance company) has its own process for administering delayed baggage compensation, but you must always first file a PIR. "Make sure you hold on to the file reference number provided by the airline," advises Pawliszyn. That will be essential for filing your baggage compensation claim. Once you've submitted your PIR, you can start shopping for essentials. "All passengers should preserve receipts for essential replacements," Pawliszyn adds. You'll need to submit those to your airline for reimbursement, noting your PIR's file reference number, often within 30 days of your flight. Additional documents you might need include your airline ticket receipt, boarding pass, and baggage claim check (the sticker handed to you when you check your bag). If an airline does not reimburse you for all of your reasonable expenses incurred due to the baggage delay, you may be able to appeal the decision. Be prepared for reimbursement to take some time, even up to a month. For any items that are not reimbursed by the airline, you can file a claim with your travel insurance, depending on your policy. TWENTY47STUDIO/GETTY IMAGES Delayed Baggage Policies of Major U.S. Airlines Alaska Airlines Baggage issues with Alaska Airlines must be reported in person at the destination airport's baggage service office within 24 hours of arrival. You must also submit receipts for travel essentials like toiletries and clothing in person at the office. American Airlines Delayed bags must be reported at the airport's baggage service office within four hours of a domestic arrival or before you leave your destination airport on an international trip. You can submit compensation claims online with the following documents: Your PIR file number Your ticket receipt and baggage claim check Original dated and itemized receipts Delta Air Lines Delayed bags must be reported at the airport's baggage service center. If your bag is delayed more than 12 hours, you may be able to receive a rebate for your checked baggage fee in the form of an e-credit. Beyond that, Delta suggests $50 per day of the delay for reasonable expenses, though the airline notes this is just a guideline, not a cap or limit. Receipts can be submitted online for reimbursement. JetBlue JetBlue allows you to report a delayed bag online instead of in person at a baggage office — you must do so within four hours of landing. Then, you can submit receipts for essential items online, which the airline will reimburse. Southwest Airlines For Southwest, you can file a report for a delayed bag at an airport baggage service office, online, via email, or by phone. Receipts can be submitted online for compensation claims. United Airlines With United, delayed baggage must be reported within 24 hours of domestic flights and seven days of international trips, either at a baggage service office or online. You can then submit receipts for essential items online for reimbursement. Was this page helpful? Related Articles What to Do If You Miss Your Connecting Flight — Including How to Get Compensated Here’s What You Should Do If an Airline Damages Your Luggage What to Know About Flight Delay Compensation How to Pick the Best Flight Insurance Policy for Your Next Trip What to Do If Your Flight Is Overbooked — Including How to Claim Compensation What to Know Before Flying EasyJet 25 Things You Should Do Before Boarding a Plane, According to a Frequent Flier 20 Tips First-time Fliers Need to Know What to Know About Refundable vs. Nonrefundable Plane Tickets Airline Baggage Fees Are on the Rise — Here's How to Fit Everything in a Carry-on and Avoid Extra Charges The Main Differences Between Business Class vs. First Class — and Tips for Booking Each The 15 Best Checked Luggage Pieces of 2024, Tested and Reviewed 5 Things Every Business Traveler Should Know A Complete Guide to Delta Fare Classes — and How to Score an Upgrade JetBlue: What to Know Before You Fly What You Should — and Should Not — Put on Your Luggage Tag in 2024 NEWSLETTER Follow Us TRIP IDEAS TRAVEL TIPS TRAVEL GUIDES WORLD'S BEST AWARDS TRAVEL PRODUCTS HOTELS + RESORTS AIRLINES + AIRPORTS NEWS CRUISES Subscribe Privacy Policy About Us Terms of Service Advertise Careers EU Privacy Travel + Leisure Wine Travel + Leisure is published by Meredith Corporation under license from Travel + Leisure Co. Copyright 2022 Travel + Leisure Co. All Rights Reserved. TRAVEL + LEISURE is a registered trademark of Travel + Leisure Co., registered in the United States and other countries. Travel + Leisure magazine may receive compensation for some links to products and services on this website. Offers may be subject to change without notice. Travel + Leisure is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family. Please review our updated Terms of Service.