MY WANDERLUSTY LIFE Destinations Areas of Expertise All Posts About Shop 16 Factors to Consider When Choosing a Hotel to Pick the Perfect One Every Time You are here: Home / General Travel Tips / 16 Factors to Consider When Choosing a Hotel to Pick the Perfect One Every Time Last Updated: April 15, 2023 // by Ashley Smith 10 Comments This post contains affiliate links and I’ll earn a percentage of the sale if you purchase through them, at no extra cost to you. All opinions are my own & I never promote anything I don’t believe in. Facebook Pinterest X (Twitter) Email WhatsApp Being that you’re here looking for the most important factors to consider when choosing a hotel, consider your search over. You’ve hit the jackpot, the mother lode, the whole enchilada of hotel search know-how. You see, I’ve booked hotels everywhere. I’ve booked them here and I’ve booked them there. In a box, with a fox, on a train, in the rain, you name it. I’ve booked so many hotels, in fact, that I’ve become a bona fide hotel booking guru. (According to both my vivid imagination and my credit card statements, that is.) Table of Contents We don’t deserve the Alps. Get my 2024 Hotel Booking Checklist here! Get my guide to picking the perfect hotel every time as a printable checklist for FREE! You'll also receive new posts and updates. No spam ever. Unsubscribe anytime. GET THE LIST NOW By subscribing you agree to the terms in my privacy policy. Choosing a hotel that’s juuuust right You see, I refuse to book anything less than the perfect hotel. I refuse to settle for anything inconvenient, overpriced, or, as we gurus like to say, sketchy as hell. So, to help you do the same, I’ve put together all my best hotel booking tips and the most important factors to consider when choosing a hotel so you can pick the perfect one every time. Consider this your hotel booking Masterclass. My favorite hotel booking site and the one I use every time is Booking.com. Because it’s really the easiest and most user-friendly one there is, I will use Booking’s platform to detail all these factors to consider when booking a hotel. This view of Notre Dame from my Paris hotel room blew me away! @ Hotel Le Notre Dame Saint Michel 1. Use ratings to weed out the worst options Of all the factors to consider when choosing a hotel, the #1 first thing I do is filter the results for hotels with ratings of 9+ only. There are no less than 20 different criteria by which to filter your hotel results. These include such things as budget, neighborhood, amenities, property type, and many more. However, I find weeding out the worst of the bunch from the get-go is the best place to start. Filtering for hotels with a rating of “Wonderful: 9+” will show you only the properties that have a rating of between 9 and 10 based on user reviews. This filter goes down to even “Pleasant: 6+”… but why would you want to waste your time looking at properties that barely have a passing score? No thank you. The hotels with ratings of 9+ tend to be the cleanest, friendliest, most pleasant hotels in the best locations. Sometimes, though, they are also the most expensive. That being said, depending on the destination, the number of 9+ hotels may be few and/or way out of your budget. Lower your filters one at a time as needed In that case, I will add “Very Good: 8+” into the mix. That typically opens up many more hotel options. And almost always, hotels with a rating of 8+ are more than acceptable! Only a few times have I ever had to lower my standards to “Good: 7+” but even then it was never the worst place I’ve stayed. The big thing to take away from this is—it all depends on your destination. With a city like Paris, you’re going to have TONS of options for all rating levels. In an alpine village like Gimmelwald, Switzerland where there are literally only 3 or 4 accommodation options, this criteria won’t even matter. (They’re all fantastic anyway!) The most delightful hotel view ever. @ Esther’s Guesthouse, Gimmelwald Regardless, I find this an important first step in choosing the perfect hotel. Otherwise, you run the risk of picking out what you think is a great hotel based on other factors like price and location, but then see the average review is a 5/10 at the last minute (or fail to notice it at all–eek!). All things considered, I find almost all of the hotels I end up choosing in the 8+ range. This combines the ratings I want to see and the location I want with prices I’m comfortable with paying. Pro tip: On Booking.com, after filtering for ratings of 8+ and 9+, you can even sort the results by “best reviewed and lowest price.” This takes into account both of these priority criteria when sorting the results for you. 2. Search by accommodation type to get exactly what you want One of the many filters you can prioritize when sifting through the factors to consider when choosing a hotel is property type. Personally—and this is just me—I greatly prefer to stay at hotels. So, I always make sure “hotels” is checked here. I hate finding the perfect room only to find out later it’s actually a room in someone’s apartment or house. Or that what I’m really booking is a single bed in a 16-person dorm. I’m perfectly fine staying in vacation rentals and hostels when the trip necessitates it, but I want to know what I’m booking up front. The only surprise I want at check-in is complimentary cookies. That being said, I know many travelers actually prefer this type of accommodation. One of the great things about Booking.com is that they also offer apartments, homestays, bed and breakfasts, and other types of vacation rentals. I.e., you don’t have to deal with Airbnb at all—you can book these rentals on “regular” booking sites too. So, if you have a preference, don’t forget to filter for it at the beginning! Heading to Belize? Check out my review of the Black Rock Lodge – one of the most amazing jungle lodges I have ever stayed at! My private jungle cabin in Belize @ Black Rock Lodge 3. Use map search to find the best locations Another of my top three factors to consider when choosing a hotel is the location. But not just the hotel’s location in general, the importance of the hotel’s location in relation to your exact trip. For instance, when visiting Munich, the “ideal location” changes at different times of the year. For Oktoberfest, you’ll most definitely want a hotel as close to the festival as possible. During the rest of the year, that’s not really the most ideal location for visitors in relation to the many things to see and do. On other trips, maybe you want a hotel near a train station or metro stop. Perhaps you need a hotel near a convention center. Maybe you want a hotel with a great view of a landmark. To find the absolute best hotel for your exact needs, and to not even have to bother with addresses and calculations, forget sorting your results altogether and simply use the map search. Location location location After filtering your results for the things that mean the most to you, click on “Show on map.” You’ll then be able to see all your hotel options on a map of the city. (You can do this under the search box on the left or by clicking on the tiny map icon in the upper right.) From that page, you can hone in on the exact (or roundabout) location you’d prefer and see available hotels in that area. Hover over the blue markers and you’ll get a snapshot of each hotel that shows its price, rating, and more. Note that if it appears there aren’t that many properties showing, simply zoom in. Zooming in will reveal more hotels in the area shown. You can even click on the small map next to the zoom buttons to see the streets as they look in real life if that helps you decide. For me, this is my absolute favorite method for choosing a hotel. I only use the map search and almost never use the standard sorting methods. Pro tip: On the left menu, be sure to check the box for “Only show available properties” if your dates aren’t flexible. This will remove all the hotels that are already fully booked during your dates. This won’t matter as much if your dates are flexible and you want to see all possible hotels. Heading to New York City? Check out my guide to the Pod Hotels of New York City – a totally fun (and affordable!) hotel experience that’s as unique as New York. 4. Test drive the location when choosing a hotel After I narrow my search down to a few choice hotels, the next thing I do is test drive the location. As a female traveler, as a female traveler who often travels alone, as a female traveler who often travels alone who also has crippling anxiety, I like to make sure the hotel’s location is something I feel totally comfortable with. Just because it’s in a “good” neighborhood or whatever doesn’t mean certain streets (etc.) won’t still give you the creeps. To do this, I type the hotel’s address into Google Maps, drop my little yellow Street View guy, and check out the location as if I’m already there. The yellow Street View dude is only if you’re using desktop. On mobile, just click the real-life image in the bottom left corner. This is especially helpful if, say, you’re a female traveling alone, you’ll be arriving at night, and you don’t really want to walk down a series of dark alleys by yourself. This helps to see what the location looks like (is it covered in trash or sketchy as hell?), what’s nearby (is it next door to an adult video store?), how accessible it is (is it easy to get to the main streets?), and so much more. To put it another way, you can totally pick up a location’s vibe from doing this. If something rubs you the wrong way, you’ll feel it. Don’t wait until you arrive (when it’s too late) to be like, “Oh damn this place is creeping me out.” (The example below is a totally random hotel I found in Florence, Italy. The Albergo Firenze, if you’re interested in spending a couple days in Florence, which you should.) Subscribe to My Wanderlusty Life! Get updates on the latest posts and more from My Wanderlusty Life straight to your inbox. No spam ever. SUBSCRIBE I consent to receiving emails and personalized ads. 5. Reviews can be a wealth of information, but… When weighing all the factors to consider when choosing a hotel, I give tons of weight to reviews. However, I take each one with a grain of salt. If that makes sense. Like they’ve always said, word of mouth is the best kind of advertising. If I want to know what a hotel is really like, and not just the way they present it online, I want to read the experiences of people who’ve stayed there themselves. However, and this is a big however, you absolutely have to consider the source each and every time, especially on the negative reviews. Do not take them at face value. Really read them and pick up all the things they aren’t saying as well. Please don’t cast aside a perfectly good hotel because of plug location. It’s easy to spot when a psychopath (sure I’ll say it) is just ranting for no justifiable reason or is being a totally stuck up a-hole. That person probably doesn’t have a single nice thing to say about any place or any business. So, move along. Like this one, there are actually tons of negative reviews that reveal exactly nothing about the property in relation to other properties. Heading to Istanbul? Check out