Menu +41 43 430 41 50 The latest on travel, languages and culture by EF Education First Free Brochure Language learning Culture Travel Career Student life Student stories 10 tips to ace a long-distance flight By Isabelle in Travel· 5 min read Global Site - English Share Apart from squeezable ketchup bottles and post-its, flying is probably one of the coolest inventions ever: You get on a plane and a few hours later, set foot in a place where everything – from the language to the food, and the weather – is different. Depending on how long those “few hours” last, you will have to sit relatively still in a rather tight space for quite a while. Check out our 10 tips to make your next transcontinental or transoceanic journey fly by. 1. Pack your carry-on If you want to look and feel like a million bucks after landing, we recommend to pack the following travel-size things in your carry-on bag: a toothbrush and toothpaste because brushing your teeth makes you feel awake and refreshed, deodorant to smell the part, and some lip balm and lotion to make sure your skin is glowing no matter how dry the air of bad the jet lag. Apart from toiletries, make sure you also have a pen and the address of the place you’re staying at (for the first night), so you can fill out all of your immigration forms without having to bother the flight attendants. 2. Accessorize & sleep Up the comfort ante with earplugs, an eye mask, and noise-canceling headphones. Together with your neck pillow, this will help you relax, snuggle up as much as an economy-class seat allows, and improve the odds to get some shut-eye. Unless you don’t want to sleep and focus on the little screen in front of you… 3. Enjoy the entertainment Time flies when you’re watching movies and TV shows. A lot of airlines let you check the movie selection online, so you can either plan your entertainment itinerary or complement it with your own collection. Even though movies are perfect to distract and delight, there’s a small chance that the in-flight entertainment system is not working: Always have a backup plan – like a book, computer games, movies, or music – so you won’t have to experience what it feels like stare at the back of seat for eight hours. 4. Mind the legroom Carry-on luggage is great. Until you have to put it under the seat in front of you and your already-limited legroom becomes basically non-existing. Make sure you put all of your luggage in the overhead bin, so you can stretch your legs and feet often and somewhat gracefully. 5. Wear comfy clothes Comfort is key when flying for hours, so bundle up in layers of clothes that you’d wear on your couch on a lazy Sunday afternoon. You know, things like hoodies, scarves (that could double as a blanket or neck-pillow), and extra pairs of socks to keep your feet happy and toasty. In case you don’t want to arrive at the destination looking like you’re wearing your pajamas, just pack a set of non-airplane clothes in your carry-on and change after landing. 6. Stretch and walk around Sitting for hours is not only uncomfortable, it can also result in dangerous blood clots. Try to stand up, walk around, and stretch your muscles as often as you can – while observing the seatbelt-sign rules, of course! Some airlines suggest exercises in the inflight magazine or on one of the TV channels. If there’s no inspiration whatsoever, you can always twist your torso, wrap your arms around yourself, stretch your legs, roll your head and ankles, or stand up and bounce on the tips of your toes. 7. Hydrate and rehydrate Drink. A. Lot. Of. Water. Flying will dehydrate your body, so you need to drink more than you’d do while being on the ground. Do not wait until you’re thirsty and have to climb over your fellow passengers to get the flight crew’s attention. Instead, buy or bring a reusable water bottle that you can fill after you go through security and top it off with the water served on the plane. Stay away from caffeinated drinks and alcohol, as they further dehydrate the body and make it more difficult to sleep. Feel free to bring some light snacks (fruit, nuts, crackers), so you won’t get hangry between meals. 8. Work out before you fly Feeling relaxed and maybe a little tired is ideal when getting ready to sit in an airplane for hours: being active and getting some exercise before your flight can help with that. Making a mad dash for the gate is not quite what we have in mind here, instead, working out, swimming a few laps or going for a run or a brisk walk before you depart can do the trick. If you don’t have time, even walking around in the airport can help. Get the latest on travel, languages and culture in the GO newsletter Sign me up 9. Learn a few sentences in the local lingo Learning a new language is not only a good way to pass time, it will also make your after-landing life so much easier. You can use a book, save some audio files on your phone or watch videos on your tablet and greet the immigration officers, cab drivers and hotel receptionists like a local. If one language is not enough of a challenge, try learning a few sentences in the language of each of the countries you’re flying over. 10. Meet your neighbors Striking up a conversation with the person next to you doesn’t always work, but it’s worth a shot – you never know whom you’re sitting next to and a lot of friendships, business deals, and travel plans started on planes. Plus, once you’ve introduced yourself and maybe even got into a little bit of small talk, asking ask for movie recommendations or even the cookie your seat neighbor hasn’t eaten becomes much easier. Tags: Travel tips, Flying Related 10 hidden gems in Malaga By Joe · 5 min read 8 must-see musicals in New York By Helena · 5 min read 6 of the world's best cities for art lovers By Emma · 4 min read 8 weird and wonderful spots to explore this year By Emma · 4 min read See more from Travel Popular 20 English idioms that everyone should know By Emma · 5 min read 15 English abbreviations you need to know By Erin · 4 min read 50 most inspiring travel quotes of all time By Simon · 4 min read 11 bits of WhatsApp slang you need to master today By Sonja · 4 min read 10 most difficult words in English By Erin · 5 min read We'd love to stay in touch Get the latest on travel, languages and culture with our newsletter. We send it out once a month and you can opt out anytime. Afghanistan Albania Algeria American Samoa Andorra Angola Anguilla Antarctica Antigua And Barbuda Argentina Armenia Aruba Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bahamas Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bermuda Bhutan Bolivia Bosnia And Herzegowina Botswana Bouvet Island Brazil British Indian Ocean Territory Brunei Darussalam Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Canada Cape Verde Cayman Islands Central African Republic Chad Chile China Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Colombia Comoros Congo Cook Islands Costa Rica Cote D'Ivoire Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Democratic Republic of the Congo Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic East Timor Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia Ethiopia Falkland Islands Faroe Islands Fiji Finland France French Guiana French Polynesia French Southern Territories Gabon Gambia Georgia Germany Ghana Gibraltar Greece Greenland Grenada Guadeloupe Guam Guatemala Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti Heard And Mc Donald Islands Honduras Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Iraq Ireland Israel Italy Jamaica Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Macau Macedonia Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Marshall Islands Martinique Mauritania Mauritius Mayotte Mexico Micronesia Moldova, Republic Of Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Montserrat Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Namibia Nauru Nepal Netherlands Netherlands Antilles New Caledonia New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria Niue Norfolk Island North Korea Northern Mariana Islands Norway Oman Pakistan Palau Palestinian Territory Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Pitcairn Poland Portugal Puerto Rico Qatar Reunion Romania Russia Rwanda Saint Kitts And Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent And The Grenadines Samoa San Marino Sao Tome And Principe Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Slovakia Slovenia Solomon Islands Somalia South Africa South Georgia South Korea South Sudan Spain Sri Lanka St. Helena St. Pierre And Miquelon Sudan Suriname Svalbard And Jan Mayen Islands Swaziland Sweden Switzerland Syrian Arab Republic Taiwan Tajikistan Tanzania Thailand Togo Tokelau Tonga Trinidad And Tobago Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Turks And Caicos Islands Tuvalu Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States United States Minor Outlying Islands Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Vatican City State (Holy See) Venezuela Viet Nam Virgin Islands (British) Virgin Islands (U.S.) Wallis And Futuna Islands Western Sahara Yemen Zaire Zambia Zimbabwe Yes, I (or my legal guardian) have read and understood how EF processes my personal data as set out in the Privacy Policy, and agree to EF's use of my personal data for direct marketing purposes. Sign me up Thank you! You are now subscribed. You'll hear from us soon! About EF's GO Blog EF's GO blog offers the latest on travel, languages, culture, international careers and student life. We live and breathe this stuff here at EF and hope GO inspires, excites and helps you plot your next steps in life. About EF International Language Campuses Our mission is simple: We open the world through education. For over 55 years, millions of students have traveled abroad with us to learn a language and become immersed in a new culture. Today, students from over 100 countries study one of 10 languages at EF's 50 International Language Campuses in 20 countries around the world. Programs by age 10 - 14 years 14 - 18 years 18 - 25 years 25 + years 50 + years Companies and governments All ages Popular programs Student exchange programs Learn French in France Language school in Japan Learn French in Paris Learn Spanish in Spain Language school in Korea Study abroad Learn Italian in Italy High school study abroad Learn English All programs Discover EF Blog EF English Proficiency Index (EF EPI) Resources for learning English Language tests EF Teacher Zone Useful guides About EF Education First About us EF Offices All EF programs Careers at EF Headquarters Selnaustrasse 30 8001 Zürich +41 43 430 41 50 View all worldwide offices Privacy policyTerms and ConditionsCookies© Signum International AG 2024. All rights reserved.