Destinations Travel Tips Gear Working Online Resources Explore Advantages And Disadvantages Of Traveling By Train Melissa Giroux | Last updated Feb 25 2023 | Travel Tips If you’re planning your next big trip and considering whether to travel by train, you need to know the main advantages and disadvantages of traveling by train. Traveling by train might not give you the same sense of freedom you’d get when traveling by car, but it can be a good experience too. Think about the scenic trains in the European Alps – there’s a lot to see when you’re on a scenic train. When you travel by train, you can enjoy the freedom of not having to find parking or drive, and simply relax, or work. Before you embark on your train journey, you should weigh the pros and cons of traveling by train first. You may want to consider other alternatives like airplanes or cars. Contents hide 5 Advantages Of Traveling By Train 1. You Have Time To Relax, Sleep, Or Work 2. It’s Comfortable 3. It’s Affordable 4. It’s Often Faster Than Traveling By Bus 5. Trains Are Usually Reliable 5 Disadvantages Of Traveling By Train 1. It Can Feel Long And Exhausting 2. You Might Experience Train Problems 3. You’re Not Alone 4. Traveling By Train Isn’t Always An Option 5. There Is The Risk Of Theft Final Thoughts On Traveling By Train 5 Advantages Of Traveling By Train Most of the time, traveling by train makes your life a lot easier. There are several advantages of train travel including the fact that it gives you more time to relax, sleep, and work when you set out on your adventure. 1. You Have Time To Relax, Sleep, Or Work When you travel by train, you don’t need to drive or handle difficult parking situations. Instead, you can watch a travel movie, catch up on work, take a nap or simply relax. You can also use that time to plan your travel itinerary. Basically, use that time to do whatever you want to do because there’s no need to worry about directions and getting lost. 2. It’S Comfortable Another awesome thing about train travel is that it’s comfortable. You won’t need to stay in your seat. You can walk around if you need during the train journey and you can even take a seat that has a table. This way, you can eat, work, or rest your head. If we compare trains with buses, we can all agree that trains are more comfortable. Buses tend to be quite packed, and it’s not always comfortable. That said, many trains have different classes, which means you could get an even more comfortable seat by paying more. Also, if you decide to travel at night, a train can be more comfortable than a sleeper bus. 3. It’S Affordable Traveling by train is usually mid-range transportation. Usually, it’ll be cheaper than traveling by car or by plane, but it could be more expensive than traveling by bus. Many travelers prefer to choose the train over buses especially if they are seeking comfort. That said, traveling by train can be faster. 4. It’S Often Faster Than Traveling By Bus Traveling by train is usually faster than traveling by bus. While you may have more stops on the way, trains are usually faster because there are no traffic jams. While it may not be as fast as a plane, a train is definitely faster than most transport. 5. Trains Are Usually Reliable Traveling by train is usually stress-free. While trains can face delays, it’s quite rare. You can simply look at the timetable and know what to expect. If we compare trains to planes or even cars, you shouldn’t have to deal with too many unexpected delays. That said, it’s rare that a train is delayed because of the weather, or because of traffic. We can’t say the same about planes, can we? 5 Disadvantages Of Traveling By Train Unfortunately, traveling by train comes with disadvantages too. Every transport has its pros and cons. Traveling by train might be comfortable and affordable, but it’s definitely not a private experience. 1. It Can Feel Long And Exhausting Perhaps the biggest drawback of train travel is how tired it can make you feel. Spending hours on a train can be tiring, especially if you’re traveling at night. We recommend you walk around if you need to stretch during a long train journey. What’s more, to prevent boredom, think about downloading movies on Netflix prior to the trip, or make sure to bring a good book. 2. You Might Experience Train Problems Unfortunately, no means of transport is 100% reliable. Trains can have all kinds of issues, and while it doesn’t happen all the time, it does happen from time to time. If you’re worried about this, make sure to buy travel insurance. Also, bring a bottle of water and snacks to make sure you don’t go into “hangry mode”. 3. You’Re Not Alone If you prefer to be alone, driving might be a better option for you. That said, not everyone likes to be sitting next to a stranger. We get it, we love our space too. When traveling on a train, you may be sitting with a lot of different passengers, and this can influence your trip. We all got some annoying neighbors at some point, and unless you’re sitting next to your friend, there’s not much you can do about it. 4. Traveling By Train Isn’T Always An Option Train travel is not available in some destinations. We recommend you look for train routes before to see if the journey you wish to take is available. With limited seats, some longer journeys require you to book in advance. For example, in Europe, there are plenty of trains, but some multi-country journeys are not always possible. You’ll need to look in advance to find out if the routes are available. When trains are not operating in a destination, you’ll need to look for other options such as car rentals or buses. 5. There Is The Risk Of Theft There is always the risk that your belongings will get stolen while you are sleeping or not watching. While theft can happen anywhere, if you’re traveling by train through a country with a high theft risk, the chances are much higher. Even so, practicing caution will reduce the likelihood of this happening. We recommend you use a padlock to secure your luggage, and that you keep your valuables on you or close by. Never leave your belongings in plain sight, take valuables with you, and get travel insurance that covers theft. Final Thoughts On Traveling By Train As you can see, there are many advantages and disadvantages of traveling by train. If you choose to travel by train on your next trip, prepare well and take precautions to ensure a fun and memorable trip. Want to make better decisions while traveling? Read the following guides: Advantages and disadvantages of traveling by car Advantages and disadvantages of staying in a hotel Advantages and disadvantages of traveling by boat Advantages and disadvantages of traveling by plane About Melissa Giroux Melissa Giroux founded abrokenbackpack.com in 2015. She is been living abroad since 2014. Originally Canadian, she has been living and working online in many destinations around the world. She is passionate about traveling, technology, entrepreneurship, and CrossFit. She has traveled extensively in Asia, Oceania, Europe, and North America. She is now living in Thailand. ☑ Book your flight: Who said you won’t be able to find cheap flights? My top saving tip is flexibility. If you're flexible, you should be able to find a cheaper flight. Check out Skyscanner or Google Flights for the hottest deals. ☑ Book your accommodation: Want the comfort of being at home or the luxury of a hotel? I love using Vrbo and Booking.com for those very reasons. If you're a solo traveler, Hostelworld offers a wide variety of hostels you should take a look at. Alternatively, if you're a budget traveler, sign up for Worldpackers to get FREE accommodation in exchange for work. ☑ Rent a car or an RV: Make your trip more comfortable by renting a car with DiscoverCars.com. This website allows you to compare car rentals around the world. If you're traveling in the United States, find an RV rental on RVshare. ☑ Stay safe: Travel mishaps happen – so, better be safe than sorry by covering your back with travel medical insurance. I would suggest SafetyWing, Genki or Heymondo as they offer the best rates, especially for long-term travelers. ☑ Pack the essentials: Universal charger, check; power bank, check; passport, check! What else could you forget? I've put together this ultimate packing list just for you! ☑ Do you need a visa? If you aren't sure if you need a visa, it’s highly recommended for you to double-check. You can use iVisa - it's super useful and easy to use. Disclaimer: This post may include affiliate links. If you click one of them, we may receive a commission at no extra cost to you. MY TOP RECOMMENDATIONS BOOK HOTEL ON BOOKING.COM BOOK HOSTEL ON HOSTELWORLD GET YOUR TRAVEL INSURANCE LEARN HOW TO START A TRAVEL BLOG LEARN HOW TO VOLUNTEER ABROAD ABOUT About Melissa Contact Jobs Press Privacy policy Work with us TRAVEL TIPS Destinations Travel blog Travel glossary Travel SIM cards Travel web stories BOOK YOUR TRIP Book accommodation on Booking.com Best travel websites Compare flights on Skyscanner Find car rentals on Discover Cars Book travel insurance with SafetyWing FOLLOW US Disclaimer: This website may contain affiliate links. This basically means that I will earn a commission if you do make a purchase at no additional cost to you. All opinions are my own. Oh. And happy travels! Kindly note that we are a participant in the Amazon Services LLC Associates Program, an affiliate advertising program designed to provide a means for sites to earn advertising fees by advertising and linking to amazon.com and its partners. Amazon and the Amazon logo are trademarks of Amazon.com, Inc. or its affiliates. Designed by Melissa Giroux | Copyright © 2024 A Broken Backpack Update Privacy Settings