Already Booked? 1.800.377.9383 Email Deals Personal Quote Find a Cruise Deals Destinations & Ports Cruise Lines Land Vacations All About Cruising Contact & Support Why Cruise? Free quotes. Expert guidance. No booking fees. Cruise Deals by Destination! Cruise Deals by Cruise Line! Cruise Deals by Departure Port! Home > All About Cruising > Cruising 101 > Why Cruise? Why Cruise? Cruising is such a great vacation option because of the world of choices – cruises come in all shapes and sizes for any type of traveler. You have everything from large activity-filled mega-ships to smaller, elegantly appointed luxury vessels, and everything in between (including intimate and immersive river cruises). Explore the biggest advantages of cruising below, and if you’re still not convinced that a cruise is the right vacation for you, we still encourage you to enlist the free expert guidance of our experienced cruise consultants. We’ll help you understand all of the options – and we may even surprise you with that perfect itinerary. Free Cruise Planning 1.800.377.9383 QUICK. FREE. EASY. Personal Quote Affordable: Considering everything that’s included in your final cruise fare, cruise vacations are among the most affordable vacation options available. Not only is your ship a traveling hotel, it’s your source of unlimited fine dining, premier entertainment, exclusive enrichment opportunities and never-ending fun. Kids and additional guests even sail for free or reduced fares on select cruises. Speak with our cruise consultants to find out how to get the most value out of your cruise. Diverse Destinations: Cruises traverse the entire globe while visiting hundreds of destinations, both popular and exclusive. From Northern Europe to Antarctica, and Tahiti to Alaska – a world of choices awaits. Plus, most itineraries come in a wide range of styles and lengths, so your destination experience can be anything from an exciting, quick glimpse to a more in-depth immersion. And the best part? No matter where you go, you only have to unpack once! Impressive Ships: Modern cruise ships feature every modern amenity you could find in a land-based vacation resort, plus they transport you to new destinations while you sleep! You’ll find full-sized movie theaters, multiple swimming pools, diverse dining venues, Broadway-style performances, expansive spas, plush staterooms and unparalleled personal service. We understand that what’s perfect for one cruiser may not work for another, so we offer plenty of options. Contact our cruising experts to find a ship fit for your needs. Delicious Dining: Cruises provide several delicious complimentary dining venues, plus a few specialty restaurants for an extraordinary experience. These compliment the buffets, delis, dessert stands, coffee bars and 24-hour room service to guarantee that you’ll never want for anything. Many cruises even source their food locally during the cruise so that guests can sample fresh-made regional favorites. You could cruise through Europe's wine country and try the best wines in the world! Onboard Activities for Everyone: Cruises are also a great vacation option because of their diverse onboard activities suitable for all ages. Many ships feature thrilling waterslides, sky-high rock climbing walls, outdoor sports courts, buzzing arcades, interactive game shows and much, much more. Even the smaller vessels are not without their activities. Participate in enriching seminars, culinary workshops, lawn games, aerobic classes and spa therapies – all minutes from the plush accommodations of your personal stateroom. Top-Notch Entertainment: From Broadway-style productions to laugh-out-loud comedy shows, cruise vacations come loaded with tons of unforgettable onboard entertainment. Kids will enjoy family-friendly entertainment, and adults will marvel at the multi-talented dancers, musicians and singers performing throughout their vacation. Best of all, most of it is included in your fare, and everyone’s invited! Great Service: From the moment you step onboard, perhaps to a champagne greeting, it’s clear that cruising is a totally different guest-centric vacation experience. The entire experience is designed to please, in order that no need go unmet. Thirsty? Your drink is already coming. Sleeping in? Room service is complimentary. Not sure what to do in port? Experts are available throughout the ship. Sore after an active day? Be rejuvenated in the spa. When possible, speak with a consultant ahead of time to ensure all special requests are met. Safe: Cruise ships are remarkably safe vacation options. Incidents are extremely rare, but expertly trained officers and security personnel are on hand to resolve any issues. All ships are designed, operated and frequently re-inspected to ensure safety. Plus, security plans and protocols are in place to guarantee efficient emergency procedures, with sufficient lifeboats for everyone on board. Unfortunate events in recent history have misrepresented the true level of cruise ship security, but cruise lines have responded by going beyond safety requirements. Convenient: Most of all, cruises are super convenient. You’ll visit multiple destinations while unpacking just once. You won’t have to worry about finding transportation from port to port, island to island and country to country. Tasty meals are prepared for you from extensive menus. Remarkable entertainment and onboard activities are just a short walk away from your bedroom. Plus, you have the FREE expert guidance of The Cruise Web’s highly-trained cruise consultants to make everything easy. We’ll work with you to make sure that everything you’re looking for is bundled together in the ultimate cruise. Cruise Vacation vs. Land Vacation Cruise Ship* Land Hotel/Resort Well appointed overnight accommodations Yes Yes Visit multiple destinations with transportation included Yes No Seated and buffet meals included daily Yes No Complimentary 24-hour room service Yes No All-inclusive beverage packages available Yes Yes A selection of specialty restaurants Yes No Internet Access Yes Yes Business Services Yes Yes Daily program of activities delivered to each room Yes No Daily entertainment on premises from day to night Yes No Variety of complimentary activities for all guests Yes No Full children/teen programs for ages 2-17 Yes No Day and evening babysitting services available Yes No Casino gambling, enrichment lectures and live theater Yes No Photography services (photo purchases are extra) Yes No Complimentary health and fitness club Yes No Full service spa and salon available Yes No Duty-free shopping on premises Yes No On-premise medical services available 24-hours Yes No Local, state and occupancy taxes on all food and beverage No Yes * Cruise ship amenities vary based on cruise line, ship and itinerary. Please contact The Cruise Web for exact amenities available on a particular cruise vacation. Free Cruise Planning 1.800.377.9383 Personal Quote Let Us Help Plan Your Dream Vacation We Make Vacation Planning Easy With an overwhelming world of choices, we understand you may need some personal assistance to plan your perfect vacation. From finding the right destination to choosing the best departure date, we're here to help. Plus, our experienced travel consultants have access to exclusive vacation deals to make sure you get the best value for your time and money. Expert guidance. No booking fees. Free Vacation Planning 1.800.377.9383 QUICK. FREE. EASY. Personal Quote Find a Cruise All Cruise Types Popular Cruises Luxury Cruises River Cruises Advanced Search Vacation Deals Featured Cruise Deals Deals by Destination Deals by Cruise Line Deals by Departure Port Family Cruise Deals Destinations & Ports Alaska Asia Canada / New England Caribbean Europe All Destinations All Ports Cruise Lines Popular Cruise Lines Luxury Cruise Lines River Cruise Lines All Cruise Lines Land Vacations Cosmos Tours Globus Journeys Kensington Tours Tauck Tours Need Help? All About Cruising Free Consultation Already Booked Contact Us Careers Connect With Us Follow our social media and blog for the latest cruise and travel news, including our best vacation deals. Blog Monthly Newsletter Subscribe to Email Deals The Cruise Web, Inc. 8614 Westwood Center Drive, Suite 800, Tysons, VA 22182 Phone: 1.800.377.9383 International: 001.240.487.0155 Fax: 1.240.487.0154 Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy Site Map Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information Copyright © 1994 – 2024 The Cruise Web, Inc. OFFER ID# Olark launch button clip path Chat with us!