Contact Us (724) 735-2417 449 Campground Road Harrisville, PA 16038 WAYS TO STAY THINGS TO DO SPECIAL OFFERS AT THE PARK CART RESERVE NOW BENEFITS OF BOOKING A CAMPING EXPERIENCE VS. A HOTEL There's nothing better than the feeling of lodging somewhere new in a big, comfortable bed and exploring all the amenities there is to offer. Are you looking for Harrisville, Pennsylvania hotels for your next trip? What if we told you there's a better way to experience this than booking a hotel? At Jellystone Park™ Kozy Rest, we offer 12 unique cabin types that give you the same feeling as a hotel, but with way more benefits! If you're considering taking a trip to Harrisville, keep reading for the benefits of booking a Pennylvania camping experience over a hotel! Lower Cost Spreading your family throughout multiple hotel rooms to fit everyone can get pretty costly, which is why booking a Pennylvania group cabin at our Camp-Resort can actually help you save big on your vacation. Most of our luxury cabins can sleep up to 7 people, so you only need to book one cabin instead of two hotel rooms. Plus, we have 10+ attractions included in your stay, so you don't need to spend a lot on activities to do outside of your lodging costs! If you're looking into RV camping near Pittsburgh, PA, choose to camp with us! You'll save even more on lodging while still getting the same benefits of included attractions! Enjoy the Fresh Air Booking a hotel might coop you up inside for a majority of your vacation. When you book a Western Pennsylvania camping experience at Jellystone Park™ Kozy Rest, you can enjoy and appreciate the outdoors! Get away from the busy city and breathe in the fresh air and the great outdoors. If you want to cool off during your stay, splash the day away at our swimming pool or enjoy some peace and quiet in your cabin. Whatever you choose to do during your stay, you're more than likely going to spend it outside! Make New Friends While hotel rooms are secluded and only meant for sleeping during your vacation, our Camp-Resort gives you plenty of opportunities to make new friends! No matter what age you are, there are always friendly faces and families for you to meet. Maybe you'll meet a friend while playing mini golf or soaring on the jumping pillow! You might even meet a friend tie-dying a t-shirt. If you participate in our themes, you might become friends with another family taking part in our themed events. There are plenty of opportunities for you to walk away with a new buddy or two after camping at Jellystone Park™ Kozy Rest, one of the best family campgrounds in Pennsylvania! Quality Family Time Going back to lodging, you'll get to spend more time with your family when you book a camping trip over a hotel! Instead of your family being divided between multiple rooms, you can spend quality time together under one roof, while still getting the benefits of a private bedroom! Rather than relaxing in bed and watching tv all night in your hotel room, there are plenty of activities for all ages that will keep you and your family busy and bring you closer together during your stay! Bring Your Furry Friend It might be difficult to find a Harrisville, PA hotel willing to accommodate your furry friends, but our Camp-Resort offers pet-friendly cabins and allows pets all of our RV sites! Put them on a leash and let your dog burn some energy at our Camp-Resort. Plus, maybe your pet will make a furry friend of their own! Included Attractions While hotel costs only include your room, and maybe a pool, our Camp-Resort includes most of our attractions and activities in your cabin or campsite price! No need to make an itinerary with expensive things to do when you can just step outside your site and explore all the included attractions we have to offer! Play endless rounds of mini golf with the entire family at no cost at all. Plus, when you book a peak season stay, we offer daily activities at no cost! Click here to see a full list of attractions included in your stay and enjoy our Pennsylvania campgrounds with a pool. More Privacy You may get your own private room when you book a hotel, but you get an entire cabin all to yourself when you choose a camping experience! Our cabins offer more amenities than Harrisville, PA hotels, such as full kitchens, a private porch, a fire pit, and a picnic table! You won't have to worry about your hotel neighbors keeping you up all night with their loud noises when you book a cabin over a hotel stay. Choosing a camping experience at Jellystone Park™ Kozy Rest over a booking a hotel gives you plenty of benefits that will make your vacation even better! When you stay at our Camp-Resort, you'll still get all of the benefits of being close to a bigger city while still escaping the hustle and bustle that comes with city lodging! Enjoy lower rates, making new friends, and more when you book a camping trip over a Harrisville, PA hotel. Book a vacation that the whole family will love here. Park Highlights FROM THE JOURNAL READ ALL BLOGS March 29, 2024 Everything You Should Know About Family Camping in Pennsylvania With luxury cabins rentals, on-site attractions, and rotating themes, see why Jellystone Park™ Kozy Rest is the best family campground in Pennsylvania! March 21, 2024 Discover What's New for 2024 at Jellystone Park™ Kozy Rest The 2024 season will be one to remember - enjoy improvements like new themed weekends, a huge Water Zone, & new cabin types! March 15, 2024 Can't-Miss Spring Events of 2024 at Jellystone Park™ Kozy Rest Book a spring camping trip at our Pennsylvania campground and enjoy lower rates, limited time deals, your favorite attractions, and fun themed weekends! Frequently Asked Questions Where can I find information about themed events at the Camp-Resort? We are looking to experience Pennsylvania glamping at its finest. What accommodations do you recommend? How far away is your Pennslyvania campground from Pittsburgh? Why should I stay at your Western Pennsylvania campground over other campgrounds in the area? What makes you one of the best campgrounds in Pennsylvania for families? How do I reserve my stay? SEE ALL FAQS Sign up for our newsletter SIGN UP By clicking submit, I want to receive promotional emails from Yogi Bear's Jellystone Park™ Kozy Rest and acknowledge and agree to the terms of the Privacy Policy Contact Email: camp@pittsburghjellystone.com Reservations: (724) 735-2417 Address 449 Campground Road Harrisville, PA 16038 WAYS TO STAY Cabins RV Sites All Accomodations Seasonal Camping Park Passes THINGS TO DO Attractions Weekly Themes Daily Events & Activities Add-Ons On-Site Dining Halloween at Jellystone Park™ SPECIAL OFFERS Deals Club Yogi Rewards Field Trips AT THE PARK Hours of Operation Camp-Resort Map Camp-Resort Guide Facilities FAQs Job Opportunities Privacy Policy Blog Contact Us MORE Rules and Policies jellystonepark.com | Club Yogi™ Rewards | warnerbros.com YOGI BEAR and all related characters and elements © & ™ Hanna-Barbera. (s24) This site is protected by reCAPTCHA Enterprise and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply. Managed by Northgate Resorts | Built with White Pine Digital | Powered by Campspot