ACCOMMODATION EVENTS SPECIALS LOCATION INFO NEWS PAYFLEX DEALS BOOK 6 Tips on How to Choose the Perfect Hotel for a Family Holiday 3 min read Choosing the perfect hotel for a family holiday is one of the most essential decisions to make when you are planning your trip. If you make the wrong booking, you could end up overspending, feeling exhausted, staying in a scary part of town, or simply have a terrible time throughout your well-deserved breakaway. If you choose the best hotel for your trip, you can enjoy the family trip you deserve. Location Location is everything when you book accommodation. Picking the best location can mean the difference between a miserable or enjoyable hotel stay. Do you want to vacay in the heart of the city or close to the beach? Dolphin Beach Hotel is located directly on the beach, you don’t even have to cross a road for an enjoyable beach walk. Transportation is another essential factor too. If you want to save on costs when renting a car, make sure you book a hotel that is within walking distance of the beach. Check with the hotel beforehand if they provide a shuttle service from the airport or to nearby attractions, and if they charge a fee for the service. On-Site Dining Choices After a long day of traveling and exploring, it is nice to have the choice of one or two on-site restaurants at the hotel. Blowfish Restaurant is our inhouse dining option at Dolphin Beach hotel, with superb breakfast, lunch, dinner and room service options. If you prefer doing it yourself, some hotels have facilities in the rooms as well, like a microwave, kettle, oven, fridge, etc. Décor and mood Eye-catching art, fresh flowers, and thoughtful design makes all the difference to make your vacation experience more enjoyable. Even if you are on a stringent budget, you need to have a comfortable place to sleep that is inviting and clean. Breakfast Included Whenever you’re browsing for the perfect hotel for a family vacation, be sure to take included freebies into account like breakfast. Having to pay for breakfast each morning as well can quickly add up, both in money and time spent. Swimming pool A decisive factor in selecting a hotel for many families is whether there is a swimming pool. This is usually a crowd-pleaser for many families. Dolphin Beach Hotel has a lovely beach-side pool the whole family can enjoy. Affordability This is probably the most obvious factor when booking accommodation for a family vacation. Irrespective of your budget, you need to consider the pros and cons of each item on your perfect hotel wish list and evaluate whether the extras are worth paying more for. Dolphin Beach – The Perfect Hotel for a Family Vacation Dolphin Beach Hotel is situated on the famous Dolphin Beach and a short walk from Blouberg. It is the perfect hotel for a family vacation with plenty of amenities – and reasons – why you should choose them: Great online rates Million dollar views Direct beach access Playgrounds Large rooms Lush gardens and large lawns Close to family activities Daily housekeeping Blowfish Restaurant and bar Swimming pool Free infant beds/cribs Wellness Studio Conclusion We hope these 6 tips will help you with finding the perfect hotel for a family vacation to book accommodation that will make your holiday a truly memorable one. Share Article Article Category TRAVELLING PREVIOUS ARTICLE EXPLORE Dolphin Beach Hotel – A Kite Surfers Paradise NEXT ARTICLE EXPLORE Flower Season at Dolphin Beach Hotel Categories Family Activities Explore Travelling Weddings Travel Awards Pensioners Celebrations Tags Travelling Sight Seeing Explore Family Activities Business Weddings Travel Awards Pensioners Celebrations Lastest Specials Get an additional 10% discount when booking directly using the code Get an additional 10% discount when booking directly using the code. READ MORE Explore Home Hotel Facilities News Articles Dining Spa & Wellness Contact Privacy Policy POPI Act Compliance Contact 1 Marine Drive, Table View South Africa 7441 +27-21-557-8140 +27-79-719-4427 info@dolphinbeachhotel.co.za Subscribe to our newsletter to be the first to hear about exciting special offers, news and updates. JOIN NEWSLETTER © 2024 Dolphin Beach Hotel. All right reserved. Singer Group