O Search FAQ +1 877-932-4259 Log In | Register PLAN A CRUISE DESTINATIONS THE EXPERIENCE CRUISE DEALS ALREADY BOOKED HAL Blog Travel Inspiration Cruise Planning Activities What’s New Home Travel Inspiration Why Cruises Can Be the Best Vacations SHARE THIS ARTICLE TAGS CRUISE BOOKING EDUCATION Get In The Know Why Cruises Can Be the Best Vacations SUBMITTED BY LESLEY MCMILLEN DEC 21, 2023 | 3 MIN READ Vacations are meant to be a relaxing escape from everyday life, opening a world of adventure while creating space to unwind. If you’re looking for a memorable getaway that brings both ease and joy to travel, look no further than a cruise vacation. What makes a cruise so perfect? Here’s why cruises can be the best vacations. A Great Value for the Experience Cruising is an incredible value for your vacation dollar. With fares starting as low as $49 per person per day, nearly everything you need to make it a memorable trip is included in the fare, and there’s no need to constantly check your budget once on board. You can make it as all-inclusive as you want or opt to forego add-on options. When you book your cruise, you’re getting your accommodations (which range from a comfortable inside stateroom to a spacious suite), main and casual dining options, daily activities and entertainment, select beverages, and a thoughtfully crafted travel itinerary all included in the price of your fare. If you want to enhance your experience, add our Have It All premium package and make it an even better value with included shore excursions, a Signature Beverage Package, Wi-Fi and specialty dining. Our cruise deals help you maximize your vacation, making a sweet experience even sweeter. Enjoy ocean views and unforgettable sunsets on Holland America cruises. Stress-Free and Smooth Seas The key to cruising is ease. From the time you step aboard, Holland America’s award-winning personalized service welcomes you to an unforgettable experience. Cruising makes it easy to see multiple breathtaking destinations in one seamless vacation, meaning you only have to unpack once to wake up to new scenery, and perhaps even a different country, every day. Our flexible itineraries also allow you to find a cruise duration that works best for you, from a few days to more than 100 days on a Grand Voyage. On a cruise, you always know where you are staying, your meals are planned (and expertly prepared) for you, evening entertainment is at your fingertips late into the evening, and we even do all the cleaning so you don’t have to. An Unforgettable Multi-Generational Vacation Making memories with loved ones is priceless. Due to the diversity of options and convenience of a cruise, it’s a great way to travel with multiple generations. There’s something for everyone to do on board and shore excursions cater to all likes and activity levels. During sea days, everyone can choose what they want to do, from relaxing by the pool with a cocktail in hand, having fun at our Kids Club, playing trivia or heading to the spa. In port, Holland America offers an extensive variety of shore excursions to help you further explore destinations. The whole family will be happy doing what they love, whether that’s learning about local wildlife, taking a city tour, visiting a historic treasure or ziplining through the forest. Afterwards it’s fun to come together during mealtimes to share adventures from the day. Enjoy a vacation getaway with every member of your family. A Destination for Everyone Holland America visits all seven continents with incredible itineraries, stretching from the North Pole to Antarctica. The toughest decision you’ll have to make when you book a cruise is where to go. If you want fun in the sun, island-hop around the Caribbean. Seeking a vacation with history, art and architecture? Europe and Asia are calling. Looking to reach rarely visited locales? Alaska, Norway and Antarctica are a dream with jaw-dropping glaciers, stunning fjords and wildlife galore. If charming ports and lighthouses are on your list, head to Canada and New England. The one thing you’ll find no matter where you cruise is an immersive experience that allows for deeper connections to the people and places we visit. Our cruise itineraries are designed to showcase the best of each region, while local cultures are celebrated on board through mouthwatering cuisine, entertainment and enriching presentations. Explore breathtaking destinations like Half Moon Cay, Holland America’s award-winning private island in the Bahamas. When you choose to cruise, seas the limit! Why do you think cruises can be the best vacations? Share in the comments below. Then learn more about Holland America cruises and the breathtaking destinations that await you. COMMENTS Related Articles APR 02, 2024 | WHERE TO TRAVEL Embark on Island-Hopping Adventures in the Caribbean Read Article APR 01, 2024 | WHERE TO TRAVEL 5 Breathtaking UNESCO Sites in the Mediterranean Read Article MAR 15, 2024 | WHERE TO TRAVEL Savor the Sights of Mexico and Pacific Coast Cruises Read Article @hollandamericaline @halcruises @hollandamericaline @hollandamericaline About Us Our Company Careers Contact Us Diversity & Inclusion Visa® Rewards Card Holland America Line Blog Travel Resources Manage My Cruise Check In News & Advisories Buy a Gift for a Guest Buy a Gift Card Free Ebrochures Accessibility Frequently Asked Questions Discover Cruising Search Cruises All Destinations Shore Excursions Our Ships Flight Ease Cruise Deals Sign Up for Special Offers Holland America Line Rewards Visa® Card For Travel Advisors Passenger Bill of Rights Cruise Contact Privacy & Cookies Do Not Sell My Personal Information Site Map “Best Cruise Itineraries: Alaska | Mexican Riviera | Panama Canal” 2019 Cruise Critic Awards