Latest Posts About Work with Me Free Resources Support my work Van Life Gear Winter Hiking Camping Backpacking Road Trips Destinations More TRAVEL TIPS 10 Travel Tips For Flying Like A Boss By Kristen Bor September 28, 2023 These 10 travel tips for flying will help you move smoothly through the airport, stay comfortable on your flight & get you to your destination in one happy piece. Find this post helpful? Learn how you can support Bearfoot Theory’s work here. You can also shop for gear through the affiliate links in this blog post where we get a small commission at no cost to you. It helps keep our team running and the lights on. THANK YOU! -Kristen Long security lines, unhealthy and overpriced food, running late, and dealing with checked luggage are just a few things that can cause stress when you are flying. Anyone who’s had a bad flight knows that it can leave you feeling tired and disheveled at the beginning or end of a vacation, and that’s never a good way to start. So what are the best tips for flying? Whether you are flying home for the holidays or halfway across the world for an epic adventure, being prepared and organized are key to a good flight. In this guide, I share 10 travel tips for flying that will help you move smoothly through the airport, stay comfortable on your flight, and get you to your destination in one happy piece. Take the stress out of long travel days with these 10 best tips for flying. 1. Invest in CLEAR or TSA PreCheck My #1 tip for flying is if you fly at least 2-3 times per year, it is worth signing up for CLEAR or TSA PreCheck to save yourself some serious time. I got TSA PreCheck years ago, and I can’t believe how much more enjoyable flying is. You breeze through the security line, and you don’t have to remove your shoes, laptops, liquids, belts or sweaters. CLEAR is an annual membership while TSA PreCheck is good for 5 years once you are approved. 2. Pack Healthy Snacks Almonds, apple slices, dried fruit, carrot sticks, and protein bars are just a few good examples of great snacks to hold you over when flying. Be sure to load up on protein and healthy fats since these will help keep you feeling full and satisfied. Packing snacks will also make it less likely that you will splurge on airport food, which is often unhealthy and overpriced. Plus, you won’t arrive at your destination starving. Check out some of our favorite lightweight hiking snacks that are easy to throw in your carry-on for when you are feeling hangry mid-flight. 3. Bring a Sleep Kit Landing at your destination well rested will help set your trip off to a great start. Whether you’re stuck in a middle seat, leaning against the cold hard window, or winging it on the aisle, bringing a few small items with you will make your flight much more comfortable. Invest in a comfy travel pillow or better yet, use a lightweight, packable backpacking pillow for flying. While you’re at it, carry an eye mask and earplugs too – both are small, easy to carry, and may come in handy, especially if you are changing time zones or end up sitting next to a screaming baby. If you need something to drown out all noise, noise-canceling headphones or noise-canceling earbuds work great. They’re pricey, but worth it if you travel a lot. 4. Organize Your Backpack Take time to organize your backpack, purse, or other carry-on before you leave home so you aren’t scrambling at the airport and lugging around more than you need to. Have a special compartment for important documents such as your boarding pass and ID so you’ll know exactly where to find them when you get to the front of the TSA line. Fanny packs are a great option for airport travel because they free your hands up and there’s no worry of forgetting your bag at the boarding gate if you keep the fanny pack secured around your waist. Also take time to stock up on flying essentials like a book, your favorite magazine, snacks, and your sleeping kit BEFORE getting to the airport. CHECK OUT THE BEST CARRY ON TRAVEL BACKPACKS 5. Download E-books, Music & Movies WiFi onboard can be expensive and slow and not all routes offer in-flight entertainment. If you have a favorite tv show or a movie you’ve been wanting to watch, download it before boarding so you can watch it during your flight. Same goes for E-books and podcasts. If you have Netflix, you can download movies and shows on your smartphone, tablet, or laptop for offline viewing. If you frequently travel with a friend, your partner or kids, you may want to consider getting a headphone splitter so you can watch together. I also have Spotify Premium which allows you to listen to your playlists when you are traveling and download them for offline use. 6. Charge Up your Devices before your Flight Make sure to have everything charged before heading to the airport. This may include your phone, laptop, camera, and any other electronics you travel with. You never know if you’ll be able to find an open outlet or if security might take longer than usual leaving no time to charge up. You may even want to consider carrying a small backup battery for your phone or other devices you use heavily when traveling. I also always bring a travel adapter that allows you to charge several devices and comes with worldwide adapters for those of you traveling abroad. 7. Pack a Reusable Water Bottle You can’t take water through the security checkpoint, but you can take an empty reusable water bottle. Most airports have water fill-up stations so you can fill a bottle post-security. Drinking lots of water is an important tip for flying because the added elevation and recycled air can result in dehydration. Having a refillable water bottle on your trip will also help you save money (and help the planet) by not having to purchase plastic water bottles every time you’re thirsty. 8. Take an Immune Supplement When you fly, you are sharing oxygen with 100+ people, who have recently shared air with another 100+ people. Get the idea? Plus you touch items that a high volume of other people touch such as security bins, seatbelts, tray tables, and door handles. Give your body a boost to fight off the germs with an immune supplement. Nuun makes handy vitamin tablets with immune boosting properties that you can toss into your reusable water bottle. While you’re at it, pack some hand sanitizer too. 9. Dress in Layers Plane temperatures can range from unbearably stuffy and hot to practically Arctic cold. Be prepared for both. Dress in a base layer that you’ll be comfortable hanging out in for the duration of your flight and bring an extra layer or two to wear on top. I like to wear a tank-top as my bottom layer just in case there’s a tarmac delay without air circulation. A warm packable jacket, good socks, and a beanie are always helpful to pack in case your flight does end up being surprisingly cold, especially on those early morning flights. SEE THE BEST PACKABLE SYNTHETIC DOWN JACKETS 10. Move on Your Layovers Layovers are a great time to stretch, walk around, and do anything but sit to counteract all those hours on the plane. Be sure to locate your next gate and check to confirm your flight is on time before you take a stroll. You can keep an eye on your flight status on monitors located throughout the airport as you walk around. Believe it or not, some airports have indoor gardens, art displays, massage chairs, yoga rooms, and even movie theaters. Explore the airport to get your steps in. Your body will thank you later. What are your favorite tips for flying? Do you have any to add? Share your experience in the comments below. Kristen Bor With two decades of hiking and seven years of van life under her belt, Kristen has dedicated her life to helping people experience the positive effects of nature. As a pioneer in the outdoor blogging space, she founded Bearfoot Theory in 2014 and has since authored more than 350 blog posts about outdoor travel, hiking, camping, and van life. Her work has been featured in National Geographic, Outside Magazine, and Backpacker, and when she’s not on the road, she lives in Park City, Utah with her partner Ryan, their son, and two adventure pups. PREVIOUS Things To Do in Big Sur: A Complete Travel Guide NEXT How to Bike Idaho’s Hiawatha Trail Leave a Reply Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked * Comment * Name * Email * Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment. 13 Comments GSE Solutions says: November 5, 2018 at 4:50 am Great tips. Also nowadays most of the restaurants at the airport provide healthy choices as well as the airlines even the low-cost ones Reply Kim Vawter says: November 7, 2018 at 9:32 am You are indeed right, it is getting better and better everytime I fly through an airport! Reply Glorias says: November 16, 2018 at 2:21 am Good tips Kristen! I like your idea of wearing a layered dress. Yes, really it is a great idea to make us comfort according to the environment. Reply Pingback: 6 Tips For Travelling On A Plane ‹ Onya Magazine Pingback: How to Control Flight Anxiety: 5 Quick and Easy Tips — Vagabondish Sabrina Addams says: January 14, 2020 at 7:00 am My husband and I are wanting to plan a trip for our 10th anniversary in May and are trying to get things organized now. I loved your idea to organize your purse or small bag before you leave home so that you find your essentials with ease when you need them. I think it’d be unforgettable if we could find a private jet charter to fly in to get that luxury experience. Reply Jeff Scheid says: November 13, 2021 at 10:11 am Always ask yourself, “what’s the backup plan”. When traveling internationally, for example, you have a passport, a scan copy file saved on a small zip drive and a paper copy. You take photos with a good camera, your iPhone is a backup and maybe a small point and shoot is second backup. We also always travel with a electronic gear bag, about the size of a toiletry kit. It has all charging cables, backup batteries, a small HDMI and adapters to plug into the tv, headphone backup, camera battery charger and my favorite a small travel USB hub with 4 ports. On a trip to Africa I plugged my USB hub in, in the dining area and came back to find others in our group plugging into my one hub. Reply Jim says: January 27, 2022 at 7:22 pm Very good tips! One item I suggest people take in their carryon is a few anti-diarrhea tablets. Needed them once on a four hour flight and was “rescued” by a flight attendant. I have many flights since, and never needed them since, but, good to be prepared. Reply Bearfoot Theory says: January 30, 2022 at 4:12 pm Thanks for sharing, Jim! Reply Natalia Wolf says: April 22, 2023 at 9:51 pm What I would do for the clothing, I would wear the heaviest things for the flight so I would have a lighter bag and won’t need to pay extra. Reply Bearfoot Theory says: April 25, 2023 at 10:48 am Hi Natalia, great tip! Thanks for sharing Reply Biz says: October 25, 2023 at 10:41 am Tsa precheck is the needed but for an extra $20 for 5 years you can get global entry which allows a faster customs line when returning to the US and includes tsa precheck Reply Kristen Bor says: October 29, 2023 at 9:07 pm Agree – I have global entry and many credit card companies will reimburse you for the cost. Thanks for chiming in! – Kristen Reply