Our website uses cookies, pixels and other tracking tools to enhance your experience and for analytics and advertising. By using our website, you agree to our Terms of Use. You may change your settings at any time or accept the default settings. You may close this banner to continue with only essential cookies. Privacy Policy Storage Preferences Targeted Advertising Personalization Analytics Save Accept All Reject All Montway Auto Transport has safely shipped 1,000,000+ vehicles to all 50 states. Read our 90,000+ online reviews to hear more about our . CAREERS CONTACT US CHECK MY ORDER HOW IT WORKS FOR INDIVIDUALS FOR BUSINESSES WHY MONTWAY (888) 666-8929 Montway's blogangle-rightUsefulangle-rightPros and Cons of Traveling by Train Pros and Cons of Traveling by Train Posted on 03/16/2011 1 min to read Share on: In the busy cities, there is always traffic jams that can make you go to work late. Have you left for work on time only to arrive very late because of traffic jam? This has happened to many people who are commuting through car. To avoid such ugly experience, many people are commuting through train. Commuter trains do not share the same route with vehicles. They move on their rails. The rails are never congested. Once a commuter train takes off, nothing will disrupt the movement until it gets to its destination. Health Benefits Research carried out from March through August 2005 in Brooklyn Polytechnic University showed that train commuters do more walking than people who commute with cars. This is probably because the commuter trains can only stop at designated places. From there the people can walk down to their offices or homes. This can serve as a means of exercise. Indeed, many people do not have time to exercise themselves because their life is just a streamline movement – from their homes to their office. Early in the morning they will drive to work and come back in the evening. But commuting through trains offers people the opportunity to walk a little bit. The research shows that greater percentage of car commuters suffer from stress and bad moods. Environmental Benefits Commuting with train is also very beneficial to the environment. Though train emits carbon dioxide to the atmosphere but the number of commuter trains is not many as the number of cars on the roads today. This explains why many people are suggesting commuter trains as the best alternative to car transport. So, you can join hand in saving the atmosphere by commuting with train. Fewer Accidents Accidents do not occur in railways as they occur on the roads. This is why transportation by train has remained the safest. There are also some disadvantages of commuting through train: Congestion In big cities with huge population, commuter trains are always congested. There are some commuter trains that allow passengers to stand up. In such commuter train, people do not normally have space even to move their bodies. This is not good for people who are suffering from respiratory problems like asthma. Besides, it can lead to the spread of diseases. Poor Air Condition Most commuter trains today do not have air conditioners. With the huge number of people on board, the train is always stuffy, hot and malodorous. Not Suitable for Children Commuter trains are suitable for children due to congestion. Children normally need space. Commuter train cannot offer them such. However, in recent time there are many commuter trains that offer maximum comfort to the passengers. Such trains are constructed with the latest technology. There are comfort rooms and comfortable seats. But such trains are more expensive than usual ones. Maintenance On the part of government, it is cheaper to maintain railways than to maintain roads. Railways are not as many as roads and they are highly durable. Once it has been constructed, it will not cost much to be maintained. Share on social media: Related Is Hemmings Legit? A Guide to Buying & Selling Used Cars with Hemmings Posted on 04/25 2023 5 min to read Classic cars, Useful 3 Insights into Employee Relocation Services Posted on 04/06 2022 3 min to read Auto industry news, Useful View more Montway Auto Transport 425 N Martingale Rd, Suite 550 Schaumburg, IL 60173 (888) 666-8929 Affiliate program Terms & conditions Copyright Terms of use Sitemap Cookie preferences Montway blog Cross country shipping Door-to-door shipping Enclosed auto transport Expedited car shipping Motorcycle shipping Open auto transport MC: 611862 DOT: 2239816 facebook twitter linkedin2 instagram Copyright © 2006-2024 by Montway Auto Transport