Inspirations Forum Packages Publish Trip Sign in Search for itineraries, destinations, hotels or activities Benefits Of Traveling By Train Benefits of Traveling by Train By Souchal Turerao 5922 VIEWS There are several good means of moving from place to place and they all have their advantages and disadvantages. Train travel is one of the most ancient and most traditional. This article covers some of the major benefits of traveling by train. It's very comfortable We all know the amount of cabin space trains have. This space provides a lot of comfort for passengers who wish to stretch themselves while in transit. Some trains have sleeper cabins, restaurants, lots of room cabin as well as other useful cabins. The seats are more spacious and comfortable than the ones on other transportations. You are less likely to feel turbulence in a train, neither will you feel sick or cramps as experienced in airplanes, ships and cars respectively. It's very safe Trains are safer now than they were in the past. Technological advancements played an important role in this. We can now be assured that trains no longer clash with other trains while in transit neither do they pull off the rail. They are also guarded by security agents which gives a more personal touch to your safety. It's environmentally friendly Yes! Traveling by train means you won't be releasing carbon into the atmosphere and if you're an ecologically conscious person you'd agree that there is nothing better than this. Train travel is known to impact the environment positively. Also, you will never be caught in a traffic jam while you are traveling by train. Train prices are fair This one is quite obvious. Train tickets are way less expensive than airline tickets or even cabs. Considering the fact that you won't even stop for gas or face any form of road traffic or delay. With trains, you just have to make a one-time ticket payment and that's it, you just sit down (or stand if you please) and enjoy the journey. It’s a fun way to travel (Lots of sightseeing) When you're traveling to and from a city, trains usually stop at several main landmarks on their way. You can easily alight when you find a place of interest as a tourist. So long as you've paid your ticket fare, this is only achievable with trains. Spontaneous travelers can benefit greatly from this. Lots of things to do with your pass-time While on a train, there are lots of opportunities to make friends and mingle with people. You get to interact with other travelers from different cultures as you relax and enjoy the ride. Of course, this is due to the fact that you're not restricted to one place unlike in a plane or in a car. You can also do the normal passing time rituals of reading a magazine, listening to music, seeing a movie or even taking a nap. When it comes to trains, the choice is yours. It’s very family friendly If you have a large family or extended family then train travel is definitely the best way to get around together as one. You can easily care for and watch your children while still having the freedom to move around and be able to reach everyone easily. Without a doubt, there are lots of great benefits when it comes to train travel. Do not hesitate to buy a ticket and experience the charms of traveling by train. Planning a trip soon? Unlock the Perfect Getaway with us Request Callback › India's Largest Travel Community About Tripoto Earn Travel Discounts Careers Contact Us Partner With Us Agent Login Products Tour Packages Travel Guides Trips & Itineraries Travel Group & Forum Weekend Getaways Places to Visit Plan Your Travel Travel Inspiration & Ideas Goa Travel Guide New Delhi Travel Guide Mumbai Travel Guide Manali Travel Guide Kerala Travel Guide Bali Travel Guide Maldives Travel Guide Meghalaya Travel Guide Sikkim Travel Guide Honeymoon Destinations In India Book Tour Packages Maldives Tour Packages Bali Tour Packages Europe Tour Packages Dubai Tour Packages Kerala Tour Packages Meghalaya Tour Packages Rajasthan Tour Packages Australia Tour Packages Singapore Tour Packages Honeymoon Tour Packages © All rights reserved • Terms • Privacy Policy