OUR PROPERTIES COLLECTIONS INSPIRATION OWNERS ABOUT BOUTIQUE LOVES TOP 5 TIPS FOR CHOOSING YOUR IDEAL TRAVEL ACCOMMODATION You have chosen your holiday destination, booked the flights and have an idea of what you want to see, but how do you choose the ideal accommodation with so much to choose from? There is a huge variety of options out there to suit every taste and budget, making choosing the right one for you a bit of a headache. Luckily for you, we have put together a helpful list of top tips, so you can make your accommodation choice in no time! 1. Location Choosing the right location can be key to your holiday happiness and requires a bit of thought. Do you want to be located right in the centre of the city or the resort with easy access to sights and amenities by foot? This is ideal if you are planning a city break! You can spend some time walking to the different ‘must sees’ and be back at your accommodation in no time to rest those tired feet before heading back out again. It is a convenient way to explore and get to know a place, but there are downsides. Being in the centre means it may be busy and potentially noisy at night. Prices are also higher. Or, would you prefer to be located a bit further out and drive or take public transport to the centre? This is a great option for a more relaxed holiday, especially if you are looking for a break at the seaside or in the countryside. You can escape the business of the urban centre and enjoy the peace and quiet. If you plan to stay outside the centre in a town or city, make sure that the accommodation is located near reliable and frequent public transport links. While you can save a lot of money by staying outside the city centre, it is not worth it if you have to spend a lot of time travelling back and forth! The same applies for non-urban locations. 2. Price How much you want to spend on your accommodation can depend on a variety of factors. One of the most important is to consider how much time you will spend at your accommodation. If you plan to spend all day visiting the sights or relaxing on the beach, it may be worth considering a cheaper option. You then have more of your holiday budget to spend on your activities! However, if you would like to spend quite a bit of time relaxing and hanging out at your accommodation, whether hotel or holiday rental, it is definitely worth investing in the experience. Consider what exactly you want your accommodation to have and see how much it would cost you. If the ideal property is out of your budget, reconsider the location and perhaps you can find something similar for less. It is also worth comparing your accommodation options online, as many options are available on multiple websites with different prices. 3. Parking An often-overlooked consideration when choosing your holiday accommodation, parking facilities are essential if you plan to drive to your destination or hire a car. Make sure to check with the property before you book, as sometimes parking will be advertised but is in reality only limited to a small number of spaces. If the place you want to stay doesn’t offer parking, but you still really want to go there then do your research on local parking options. You can often find free or reasonable parking by looking online or asking the property directly before you book. If your accommodation offers parking, but at a high additional cost (often the case in big cities), parking elsewhere can save you a considerable sum. Don’t forget to think about parking at the airport too! Many airport hotels offer parking deals for the duration of your trip, even if you do not plan to stay the night before your flight. Whether you are looking for parking at Manchester Airport or elsewhere at airports across the UK, Parkhero is a useful comparison website that can help you save. 4. Amenities When choosing your accommodation, you can easily narrow down your options by deciding what amenities you want. Most travel websites will have helpful filters to aid you and Boutique Retreats is no exception! Wi-Fi access is an important factor for most people and it is a good idea to check whether there is an extra charge, especially if you are travelling abroad. When Wi-Fi is offered free of charge, be aware that this may just mean in the accommodation common areas, such as the hotel lobby. Wi-Fi is also an important consideration if you are staying somewhere rural where mobile data is less reliable! Other amenities to consider are of course a pool, a spa or even whether or not the accommodation allows pets. Travelling with pets is becoming more common and many providers are adapting to demand, however you should always double-check what the policy is. Also consider the pet friendliness of local shops and restaurants, it is no fun having to leave your pet at the accommodation the whole time! 5. Reviews Finally, always make sure to check out customer reviews. Most accommodation websites, including Boutique Retreats in the Guestbook section, will show you reviews left by previous customers and it is a fantastic way to get a true impression of what to expect. Whether good or bad, you will be able to get an impression of your potential accommodation and see any potential things to look out for. It is also a good idea to check out the reviews on third party websites. These websites often have a greater number of reviews and can give you a better impression, than just looking through one website. However, do not just look at the bad reviews! If there are more good than bad reviews, chances are that the accommodation is on the whole a good option. Take a peek at our Boutique Collections here to uncover your dream retreat... TAGGED IN BOUTIQUE LOVES SIGN UP TO RECEIVE OUR BOUTIQUE STORIES… Stay connected with retreat magic and be the first to know about our new additions. We promise to only fill your inbox with the dreamiest staycation stories and luxury travel moments. STORIES SIGNUP EXPLORE OUR COTTAGES BLOG LOOK BOOK OWNERS SITEMAP LAST-MINUTE ESCAPES COLLECTIONS GUIDES PRESS ABOUT US GIFT VOUCHERS STAY CORNWALL THE COTSWOLDS DEVON DORSET SCOTLAND SOMERSET WALES BY THE SEA DOG FRIENDLY HOT TUBS ROMANTIC SEA VIEWS SWIMMING POOL GRAND GETAWAYS CONTACT US enquiries@boutique-retreats.co.uk 01872 553 491 © Boutique Retreats Sapphire House, Hayle Business Park, Cornwall, TR27 5JR Boutique Retreats Ltd is registered in England and Wales: Company number 08387269. PRIVACY POLICY COOKIE POLICY COOKIE PREFERENCES TERMS AND CONDITIONS