Advisor Connect Help Center Contact Us 888-993-2966 United States Get a Quote Our Plans Education Center Trip Types Traveler Types Destinations Traveler Resources My Policy Tools Travel News How to Keep Calm if You're a Nervous Flyer 09/05/2019 For some vacationers, air travel can be a major source of pre-trip anxiety. And while airplanes are widely touted as the safest way to travel, it can be hard to focus on the positives when you're experiencing heightened levels of stress. According to estimates from ABC Health & Wellbeing, close to 40% of people around the world have at least some fear of flying, with only a minor segment of the population having an intense phobia. No matter how you feel about air travel, it can be useful to learn some of the common techniques nervous flyers use to calm their nerves before and during a long flight. This insight can help you manage your own anxiety on a particularly turbulent journey or support family and friends who may not be as excited about flying as you are. Of course, every traveler has their own tolerance for flight anxiety, so if you're in full-blown panic mode it may be a good idea to speak with a mental health professional before you leave. What does flight anxiety feel like? While every nervous flyer has their own physiological response to air travel, many report feeling sick or experiencing a panic attack shortly before departing or while they're airborne, according to the Anxiety and Depression Association of America. Interestingly, some people with an acute fear of flying also have other phobias that compound their unease, such as claustrophobia or agoraphobia. In many cases, nervous flyers understand that airplanes are a relatively safe means of transportation, but find it difficult to silence their active imagination. One of the best ways to manage your pre-flight jitters is to preoccupy your mind and avoid ruminating on worst case scenarios, as this will only magnify your anxiety. But what other coping methods can help you ward off your fear of flying? 5 useful tips for keeping calm during long flights First, it's important to note that flight anxiety is usually triggered by specific stimuli, whether it be a catastrophic thought, bodily sensation or a bad memory. These sensations, in turn, can amplify their anxiety and increase their risk of panic attacks, leading to a rather unhealthy feedback loop. If you're stressed about an upcoming flight, consider using one or more of the following calming techniques: 1. Fight fear with knowledge: When it comes to a fear of flying, your anxiety is essentially tricking your body into thinking it's in immediate danger. Learning more about how airplanes work can help calm your nerves during take-off or when turbulence hits. The more you know about air travel, the less mid-flight uncertainty you'll have to contend with. It may also be useful to browse the National Transportation Safety Board's website to get a better understanding of how uncommon aviation accidents actually are. 2. Practice breathing exercises: Many people with flight anxiety experience breathing difficulties during their travels, which often results from unintentionally panting or holding their breath. These respiratory irregularities send signals to your brain that may trigger your fight-or-flight response, amplifying feelings of panic and fear. Luckily, the National Health Service published a comprehensive guide on deep breathing techniques that can help you manage your stress. 3. Refocus your attention: Keeping your mind preoccupied during a long flight can be difficult, but focusing on a specific task can do wonders for your state of mind. Nervous flyers should take full advantage of in-flight entertainment, read a book or listen to music with noise-cancelling headphones to help drown out the ambient noise. Even a minor distraction can help you calm your nerves for at least a small portion of your flight. 4. Strike up a conversation: Whether you're traveling with friends, family or flying solo, a great way to reduce your stress levels is to talk with the people seated around you. If you're particularly nervous about airplane safety, it may be helpful to introduce yourself to the flight attendants and share your concerns. Most airline professionals are happy to talk through your worries and have plenty of experience reassuring passengers that they are in safe hands. 5. Drink lots of water: When managing your flight anxiety, you may be tempted to take the edge off with a cocktail or a cup of coffee. These beverage selections, however, can exacerbate your nerves and lead to dehydration if you're not careful. Keep in mind, airplane cabins typically have very low humidity, which can quickly dry out your throat, nose and skin, according to the Cleveland Clinic. Nervous flyers should drink lots of water before and during their travels to help them stay hydrated and relaxed until their plane finally touches down. To learn more tips and tricks, read through some of our other informative travel blogs. Travel Tips and Tricks Questions? Call us at: 888-993-2966 Travel Guard on Facebook. Travel Guard on LinkedIn. Travel Guard Twitter Feed. Travel Guard's You Tube Channel. Travel Insurance Education Center Our Plans Compare Plans Coverage Information Frequently Asked Questions Get a Quote Non-US Residents COVID Information Traveler Resources Travel Safety Travel News Travel Tips Travel Guard About Us Contact Us Newsroom Careers Sell Travel Guard Affiliate Program Self Service Help Center Get a Quote View My Policy Modify My Policy Cancellations & Refunds Claims Strike List Alert List Certificate of Insurance Library Copyright © 2024, Travel Guard. Non insurance services are provided by Travel Guard. Terms of Use | Privacy Policy | Accessibility Statement | Our Underwriter | Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information | About AIG Ads Coverage available to U.S. residents of the U.S. states and District of Columbia only. This plan provides insurance coverage that only applies during the covered trip. You may have coverage from other sources that provides you with similar benefits but may be subject to different restrictions depending upon your other coverages. You may wish to compare the terms of this policy with your existing life, health, home, and automobile insurance policies. If you have any questions about your current coverage, call your insurer or insurance agent or broker. Coverage is offered by Travel Guard Group, Inc. (Travel Guard). California lic. no.0B93606, 3300 Business Park Drive, Stevens Point, WI 54482, travelguard.com. CA DOI toll free number: 800-927-HELP. This is only a brief description of the coverage(s) available. The Policy will contain reductions, limitations, exclusions and termination provisions. Insurance underwritten by National Union Fire Insurance Company of Pittsburgh, Pa., a Pennsylvania insurance company, with its principal place of business at 1271 Avenue of the Americas, 37th FL, New York, NY 10020-1304. It is currently authorized to transact business in all states and the District of Columbia. NAIC No. 19445. Coverage may not be available in all states. Your travel retailer may not be licensed to sell insurance, and cannot answer technical questions about the benefits, exclusions, and conditions of this insurance and cannot evaluate the adequacy of your existing insurance. The purchase of travel insurance is not required in order to purchase any other product or service from the Travel Retailer.