Special Offers Sign Up Log In | Register Plan a Cruise On Board Our Ships Destinations Booked Guests Help Home Cruise Articles & Videos Cruise Articles – Tips & Info 5 Reasons Why Cruise Vacations Are Better Than Resort Stays 5 Reasons Why Cruise Vacations Are Better Than Resort Stays With more to see and more to do, cruise vacations beat resort stays If you're thinking about your next escape, you may be wondering whether cruise vacations or resort stays are the best option. Though both vacations have something to offer avid travelers, cruises tend to be the most versatile, inclusive, and exciting. Let's take a look at some of the main reasons why cruise vacations rule over resort stays: 1. Quality at Your Fingertips Resorts offer activities and experiences to guests, but there's no level of quality and attention quite like that on a premier cruise line. When you go on a cruise vacation, you have so much more than unique shore excursions to look forward to — on board, you'll find top-quality Broadway-style shows, musical performances, and casino gaming. In addition to the onboard entertainment, there are also spas, art auctions, poolside activities, and plenty of opportunities to learn. As for the cuisine, a wide array of world-class, internationally-inspired dining options awaits you, including tempting Chocolate JourneysSM pastries and desserts. You'll be surrounded by friendly staff who go that extra mile for you. 2. Something Fun for Everyone Most cruise vacations involve activities for voyagers of every age — from babies and teens, to teens and adults. Whether you want to bring your family abroad for their best family cruise vacation yet, spend time with a best friend or loved one, or just treat yourself to a getaway cruise, you'll find activities that are guaranteed to inspire. If you're bringing a family, your children can safely play games and water sports while you try your hand at golf, relax in a spa, or dance the night away. Together, you can make any cruise vacation truly yours. 3. An Ocean View One especially great thing about cruise vacations is that you can enjoy a breathtaking ocean view. After a fun-filled day, cruises offer you the option to lay out on deck and stargaze like you never have before. Take in the illuminated swirl of the cosmos while your cruise ship peacefully glides along the sea. There's no other experience like it. 4. Excursions and Adventures When you're cruising, you can take time to hop off your cruise ship on immersive shore excursions, which allow you to explore select ports. If you want to experience a variety of places, cultures, and cuisines, choose a cruise. Why not cruise to South America and see the amazing Iguazú Falls, or famous Machu Picchu — one of the most important UNESCO sites in Latin America? There are endless opportunities for adventure while on a cruise. 5. A Variety of Experiences Imagine visiting a different country every day. On a cruise, you can visit various islands, cities, and entire countries in a week or two at sea. When you cruise the Caribbean, you can visit Aruba, Bonaire, Grenada, and Bahamas all within 10 days. Or, on a South America cruise, visit exotic Rio de Janeiro, explore rainforests in Limon, Costa Rica and enjoy spectacular wine tastings in Santiago, Chile. Cruise vacations are meaningful experiences that will leave you with a lifetime of memories. When you cruise the open sea, exploring ports of call and taking in new cultural experiences with Princess Cruises, there's no question that you'll come back new. Follow Us: Plan a Cruise Find Cruises & Cruisetours Cruise Deals & Promotion Learn About Cruising Cruise with Confidence New to Cruising Why Princess? Captain's Circle Loyalty Tiers Cruise Advice Top 10 New Cruiser FAQ Cruise Destinations Destination Overview Alaska Asia Australia & New Zealand California & Pacific Coast Canada & New England Caribbean Europe Getaways (3-6 Days) Hawaii Japan Mexico Panama Canal South America & Antarctica Tahiti & South Pacific World Cruises Shore Excursions Departure, Ports & Hotels Ships & Experience Ships Deck Plans Bridge Cams Onboard Experience Overview Food & Dining Beverage Packages & Drinks Activities Entertainment Kids, Teens & Families Celebrate with Princess Themed Cruises & Special Events Birthdays, Holidays & More Cruise Gifts & Services Give a Guest a Gift Booked Guests Access Cruise Personalizer® How to Get Ready Reserve Shore Excursions Departure, Ports & Hotels Book Gifts & Services FAQ: Know Before You Go Princess Medallion Class® MedallionClass® Overview Princess® Cruises App About Us Careers News Center Passage Contract Legal, Privacy & Cookies Environmental Responsibility World's Leading Cruise Lines Accessible Cruising Download Adobe Reader © 2024, Princess Cruise Lines, Ltd. All Rights Reserved. Site content may not be reproduced without express written permission.