BEAUTY FASHION CULTURE LIFESTYLE NEWS Need a Hand?: Gloves To Match Your Aesthetic If fashion has taught us one thing, it’s that some accessories can be worn no matter the season. Gloves, while often worn in the winter, are a staple accessory for anyone’s closet and can be worn during the fall, winter, and spring. With your staple gloves, you can be ready for warming up your hands during the colder months or adding some flair to an evening outfit out with friends. This fall-winter season we have seen modern takes on elegant gloves, a revival of knit arm warmers, and new chic silhouettes in silk. Based on these fun styles of gloves that I have gathered, you’ll be sure to find which pair you need to perfectly match your aesthetic! THE CLASSY MAXIMALIST: LEATHER GLOVES Maximalism is an aesthetic for someone who embraces color, contrasting patterns, and plays with different textures. Elbow-length gloves are classic and chic, but when made with leather, they can be the perfect maximalist accessory. For layering lovers, leather gloves are perfect and will keep you warm. These gloves come in various colors such as black, red, and green. Depending on how colorful your wardrobe is, you can pick which color of leather gloves you want to grab! You can also choose between real leather, faux leather, or even vegan leather. A little touch of leather can take a simple winter outfit to the next level and complete the maximalist look you may or may not be going for. WHERE TO SHOP FOR LEATHER GLOVES: AMAZON, $18 ETSY, $35 SAKS FIFTH AVENUE, $254 THE Y2K GIRLIE: KNIT ARM WARMERS In the past two years, we have seen a lot of fashion trends from the early 2000s resurface. This look is known as the Y2K style. This aesthetic revolves around funky layering, knit and sequin textures, and asymmetrical silhouettes. If you’re obsessed with the Y2K style you’ll definitely want to grab some knit arm warmers in every color! Knit gloves will not only keep you warm but are a super fun accessory. They come in all different colors, lengths, and styles. You can find these gloves online or even at your local thrift stores. If you’re a DIY kind of person, for the new year you can take up crocheting and make your own. One-of-a-kind gloves with a retro look embrace what it means to be a Y2K girlie—spunky and unique! WHERE TO SHOP FOR KNIT GLOVES/ARM WARMERS: DOLLS KILL, $12 FREE PEOPLE, $30 ETSY, $79 THE IT GIRL: MESH GLOVES For those fashion lovers that feel like the main character or a hometown celebrity, you might see yourself as an It girl. This aesthetic encompasses high-fashion and luxury styles often seen in monochromatic looks with a balance of minimalism and maximalism through accessories. Mesh gloves are extremely chic and versatile. They come in various silhouettes and colors such as nude, black, red, and hot pink. These gloves are a great accessory to add to any outfit and give off that It-girl look you might want to embody. Whether you’re wearing a casual fit to hang out with friends or going out to a dinner party, mesh gloves will give you a look of luxury. WHERE TO SHOP FOR MESH GLOVES: AMAZON, $13 SAVAGE X FENTY, $25 HMACLEODDESIGN, $85 No matter what your aesthetic may be, all of these gloves are fun and come in various colors, styles, and price ranges. So you’re sure to find a staple pair of gloves to add to your wardrobe. Which gloves match your aesthetic? Leave a comment below about your favorite glove style! Kally Compton January 4, 2022 0 0 0 COMMENTS (0) Newest First Oldest First Newest First Most Liked Least Liked Preview Post Comment… PREVIOUS New Year, New Style: Trends You Should Try in 2022 January 5, 2022 NEXT Our Beauty Director's Top Picks for 2021 December 31, 2021 THE MAGAZINE MASTHEAD SUBMISSIONS CONTACT Powered by Squarespace