NEWSLETTER STYLE BEAUTY ENTERTAINMENT SHOPPING WELLNESS CULTURE GIFTS VIDEO WOMEN OF THE YEAR HAIR The Very Best Haircuts for Women in 2024 From Honolulu to Boston, here are the most popular styles women are asking for. BY BELLA CACCIATORE AND LISA DESANTIS March 12, 2024 Whether you’re scoping out the best haircuts for women or curious to see the most popular haircuts on the rise, you’ve come to the right place. As 2024 has already shown us, haircut styles have never been more inspired. Our favorite celebs have given us plenty of inspiration, debuting pixie cuts, bangs, bobs, and everything in between for every hair type. While we love the classic lob as much as the next person, sometimes you need a little variety—and what better way to get inspired than with the coolest hairstyles from around the world We asked stylists to share the most requested styles at their salons—from lived-in shags in London, textured bobs in Austin, and curtain bangs in New York City—to bring you the best haircuts for women across the globe. Scroll on for all the best hairstyles inspiration you need. Edward Berthelot/Getty Images 1/71 Tousled Deconstructed Bob Frédéric Fekkai, whose salon is based in New York City, loves the deconstructed bob for its versatility. “With the option of having bangs or not, it features a square bob shape with jagged, textured edges, giving it a slightly messy and natural appearance,” he says. “The key is to maintain a healthy hair color that is shiny and organic. To help create the tousled appearance use the Full Blown Volume Dry Texturizing Spray for added texture and Brilliant Gloss Anti-Frizz Oil Serum for added shine.” Daniele Venturelli/Getty Images 2/71 Old Money Baroque Bob Sydney Sweeney’s take on the baroque bob will be huge with short hairstyles trending for 2024. According to Ky Wilson, a hairstylist based in London, the style is “a little longer, generally cut just above the collarbone, with lots of volume and bounce.” What really makes this style unique is the added volume and the side part. “The ends sit right on the shoulders to encourage movement,” he says. “What sets this style apart is the addition of elaborate curls, giving it the sense of effortless Old Hollywood glamour without being overstyled.” Using the right products are key. “I recommend a blowout spray like Evo’s Mister Fantastic, which will not only accelerate blow-dry time, but also will build body, increase control, and protect against heat damage,” he says. “Then you’ll want to use a hot tool like rollers or a curling iron to create the curls, I like BaByliss’s hot rollers or a 1.25-inch curling iron.” WATCH The 8 Trendiest Hairstyles of 2017 Getty Images 3/71 Asymmetric Short Bob This isn't your mother’s asymmetric bob. “This is a sleek and modern haircut,” says Fekkai. “It features a bob cut with a deep side part and hair tucked behind the ears. The nape of the neck is tapered shortly for a clean and sharp look.” For an extra-polished look, Fekkai recommends the Clean Stylers Glossing Cream+ or Brilliant Gloss Finishing Cream. 4/71 French Girl Chic French girl beauty isn’t going anywhere in 2024. “This haircut is inspired by the iconic Jane Birkin and features full French bangs paired with hair at collarbone length or longer,” says Fekkai. “The lengths are slightly broken for a soft and natural appearance, with a softer bottom.” It’s a timeless style that will look good on anyone, no matter your age. “In 2024, this haircut trend will gain popularity as it promotes a look that is all about embracing aging gracefully and confidently,” he says. “It focuses on making the hair appear shiny, youthful, and healthy, without trying to hide the natural aging process.” Most Popular ENTERTAINMENT March’s Full Moon and Lunar Eclipse Are Packed With Powerful Energy BY MARIE BLADT STYLE Zendaya Dressed as a Literal Tennis Court for the Australian Challengers Premiere BY KATHLEEN WALSH CELEBRITY STYLE Taylor Swift Wore a Totally Red-Era Striped Bikini on Vacation With Travis Kelce BY ELIZABETH LOGAN 5/71 French Girl Chic Another French-girl-inspired look is the grunge bob. “This bob is generally cut between cheekbone and jaw line. To achieve a straighter, smoother finish when styling, I would recommend wrap-drying the hair using an ionic hairdryer like the BaByliss Pro Nano Titanium Dryer and Evo’s Pete Iconic Paddle Brush to create extra bevel and bounce on the ends," Wilson says. “Finish with a heavy spray of Evo’s Shebang-a-Bang dry spray wax at the root and fringe to elevate that grungy feel.” 6/71 Haircut Hybrids Don’t be afraid to customize your style. According to Wilson, clients are stepping away from reference photos. “Right now I am seeing a lot of personalization and styles with a DIY vibe; creating a hybrid of two more popular haircuts is becoming the biggest part of my job,” he says. “Movement and layering are still hugely popular. Face-framing fringing and longer layers will continue into spring but will have a lot of variation.” Wilson recommends playing around with layering and movement, depending on your personal hair type. “The main thing for me is prime hair condition. Creating cuts that look and feel healthy, and doing things with intent to match each person’s personality and style,” he says. Most Popular ENTERTAINMENT March’s Full Moon and Lunar Eclipse Are Packed With Powerful Energy BY MARIE BLADT STYLE Zendaya Dressed as a Literal Tennis Court for the Australian Challengers Premiere BY KATHLEEN WALSH CELEBRITY STYLE Taylor Swift Wore a Totally Red-Era Striped Bikini on Vacation With Travis Kelce BY ELIZABETH LOGAN 7/71 Haircut Hybrids Shags are still going strong in 2024. And if you’re still growing out your shag haircut from last year, you’re in luck! “Those growing out their shags (or getting a haircut that gives the appearance of growing out a shag) have a lot of layers and texture that give the hair a beautiful undone, natural finish that looks extremely healthy,” Wilson says. “This look also can give a luxurious ’90s supermodel vibe depending on the cut. The key is to make the layers seamless, oozing fluidity. Ask your stylist for freehand placement of layers and texture—think freehand placement just like we do with color.” Lionel Hahn/Getty 8/71 Long Hair, Long Layers This summer, Chicago hairstylist Alex Brown says, expect lots of long hair with long, breezy layers. “I’m loving natural-looking waves with long layers around the face that add movement, and you can even add cute baby braids,” she says. To get the look, “ask your stylist for face-framing layers starting below the chin.” Most Popular ENTERTAINMENT March’s Full Moon and Lunar Eclipse Are Packed With Powerful Energy BY MARIE BLADT STYLE Zendaya Dressed as a Literal Tennis Court for the Australian Challengers Premiere BY KATHLEEN WALSH CELEBRITY STYLE Taylor Swift Wore a Totally Red-Era Striped Bikini on Vacation With Travis Kelce BY ELIZABETH LOGAN Instagram/@deepica 9/71 Long Hair, Long Layers Loose waves play up the cool factor of this cut. If you have straight hair, section your strands into four braids overnight for heatless beachy waves, or hit your hair with a waving iron and some salt spray for instant gratification. Frazer Harrison/Getty 10/71 ’90s Layers On the flip side, Brown is also seeing women in Chicago ask for thicker, ’90s layers—think a modern take on the Rachel. “I love how this makes wearing your hair up feel so much more styled and fresh,” she says. “Ask your stylist to give you a thicker chin-length layer around your face.” Most Popular ENTERTAINMENT March’s Full Moon and Lunar Eclipse Are Packed With Powerful Energy BY MARIE BLADT STYLE Zendaya Dressed as a Literal Tennis Court for the Australian Challengers Premiere BY KATHLEEN WALSH CELEBRITY STYLE Taylor Swift Wore a Totally Red-Era Striped Bikini on Vacation With Travis Kelce BY ELIZABETH LOGAN Instagram/@emilychengmakeup 11/71 ’90s Layers The best part of this style is that the choppy layers make even a formal updo feel so young and fun. Instagram/@camilacoelho 12/71 Medium-Length Hair If you’ve been dealing with scraggly ends, botched color jobs, or just generally blah hair, a mid-length cut is for you. “This length looks so chic and can help fine hair appear thicker when cut with a blunt line,” says Brown, who has been giving a lot of these looks to her Chicago clients. “Ask for a one-length cut just above your bust line.” Most Popular ENTERTAINMENT March’s Full Moon and Lunar Eclipse Are Packed With Powerful Energy BY MARIE BLADT STYLE Zendaya Dressed as a Literal Tennis Court for the Australian Challengers Premiere BY KATHLEEN WALSH CELEBRITY STYLE Taylor Swift Wore a Totally Red-Era Striped Bikini on Vacation With Travis Kelce BY ELIZABETH LOGAN Instagram/@ninapark 13/71 Medium Cut “The midi works with all textures,” says Xavier Velasquez, a hair stylist at Jenna Perry Salon in NYC and a Virtue hair ambassador. “It’s a great length that grazes the collarbone, give or take an inch or two.” The best thing about this cut is that it feels like a fresh start without taking off too much length. If a one-length chop feels a little too severe, have your hairstylist create some longer, face-framing pieces—but not layers all around—for a touch of movement. Instagram/@kourtneykardash 14/71 Blunt Bob “There is something so fashion-forward about a one-length bob that sits just above the shoulders,” says Brown who shares that this look is trending all over—not just for her cool Chicago girlies. “It’s super easy to style and can still be pulled back. Ask your stylist for a one-length cut roughly one to two inches below the chin but above the shoulders.” Most Popular ENTERTAINMENT March’s Full Moon and Lunar Eclipse Are Packed With Powerful Energy BY MARIE BLADT STYLE Zendaya Dressed as a Literal Tennis Court for the Australian Challengers Premiere BY KATHLEEN WALSH CELEBRITY STYLE Taylor Swift Wore a Totally Red-Era Striped Bikini on Vacation With Travis Kelce BY ELIZABETH LOGAN Instagram/@lacyredway 15/71 Blunt Bob Blunt doesn’t have to mean “straight,” and the short cut looks so pretty with some loose texture as well. Siobhán Quinlan, a hair stylist at Cutler West Hollywood, is seeing a major increase in clients asking for bobs in LA too. She says, “People have been growing their hair for the past few years and are ready for a change.” Instagram/@mararoszak 16/71 Blunt Bob “Women in LA are asking for healthy hair,” says Mara Roszak, a celeb stylist and founder of ethical hair care brand Roz. If that means taking off more length to get rid of dead ends, leaving them with a bob, they are willing to do it for the sake of healthy strands, she says. Most Popular ENTERTAINMENT March’s Full Moon and Lunar Eclipse Are Packed With Powerful Energy BY MARIE BLADT STYLE Zendaya Dressed as a Literal Tennis Court for the Australian Challengers Premiere BY KATHLEEN WALSH CELEBRITY STYLE Taylor Swift Wore a Totally Red-Era Striped Bikini on Vacation With Travis Kelce BY ELIZABETH LOGAN Instagram/@chrisappleton1 17/71 Long and Sleek If you still haven’t been able to make it to the salon, fear not, as LA-based celebrity hairstylist Aviva Perea says crazy-long hair is trending hard. “I have seen so many people with hair longer than they normally wear it,” she says. “I also think that it will be all about long and straight, and sleek and shiny. There’s a little bit of skill that comes with using a curling iron, but most people are able to glide a flatiron down their hair.” Roy Rochlin/Getty 18/71 Long and Sleek The key to making length look healthy, not scraggly, is asking your stylist for a blunt-bottom cut with barely there long layers. Then there are a few steps to getting that super-sleek look at home. “Straight out of the shower, you want to add a serum when your hair is still super wet—that way it’ll lock in moisture and keep your hair smooth,” says Perea. “I love the Extra Strength Serum from John Frieda. It has bamboo extract, which helps my hair stay hydrated while also minimizing frizz.” Most Popular ENTERTAINMENT March’s Full Moon and Lunar Eclipse Are Packed With Powerful Energy BY MARIE BLADT STYLE Zendaya Dressed as a Literal Tennis Court for the Australian Challengers Premiere BY KATHLEEN WALSH CELEBRITY STYLE Taylor Swift Wore a Totally Red-Era