The Everygirl Instagram Facebook Pinterest Twitter TikTok MENU CAREER & FINANCE FASHION BEAUTY LIVING WELLNESS SEX & RELATIONSHIPS TECH BACKGROUNDS HAIR 6 Hair Stylist-Approved Tips for Finally Achieving Perfect Hair JANUARY 6, 2023 written by AMANDA DIEDRICH & BETH GILLETTE The Everygirl’s product selections are curated by the editorial team. If you buy something through our links, we may earn an affiliate commission, at no cost to you. We only recommend products we genuinely love. Source: @jaxandrose You know that hair envy we all feel when we scroll through Pinterest or Instagram and see picture after picture of perfectly tousled locks? If only good hair days were so easy. That’s why we asked industry-leading hairstylist, Amanda Diedrich of Blohaute, to share her expert tips on making those lust-worthy hair Instagram pictures a reality. She shared with us six hair stylist tips for achieving soft, manageable, healthy hair that you will love regardless of hair type. SPONSORED BY / BANK OF AMERICA 6 Financial Questions You're Afraid to Ask—Answered by a Top Money Expert From living paycheck to paycheck to managing debt, here are questions and expert answers that can help level up your finance game. CLICK TO READ! 1. Go on a hair diet Every good hairstyle begins with healthy hair. Think of your hair care routine like your makeup routine: Without a good foundation, it’s almost impossible to get a polished look. If your hair isn’t healthy, it’s much harder to achieve the trendy styles seen on many celebrities. Healthy hair gives you shine, volume, and is much more manageable. Let’s start by adding a few of these tricks to your daily routine: Eat an overall healthy, balanced diet Make sure you’re eating a balanced diet of protein, carbs, and fats with all your micronutrients too. Too much sugar or caffeine can definitely affect the way your hair grows as well as its appearance. Source: Karolina Grabowska | Pexels Keep your hair moisturized Hair can get really dry from heat styling, chemical processing treatments like relaxers and hair color, and too much time in the sun. Start by using a deep conditioning treatment or mask once or twice a week. OLAPLEX No. 8 Bond Intense Moisture Mask Everyone's favorite moisturizing hair mask—it's the magic of Olaplex, but actually makes your hair look better immediately. SHOP NOW Get rid of the build-up Just like your skin, hair tends to hold onto a lot of product. Product build-up causes hair to get heavy and weighed down much faster, as well as lose that pretty shine. Introduce a clarifying shampoo to your routine to use once a week. Clarifying your hair will remove any excess build-up, but be sure to follow with a moisturizing shampoo and conditioner. ANOMOLY Clarifying Shampoo This inexpensive detox shampoo removes build-up without stripping hair. SHOP NOW Try a cold shot As cold as it may be outside, sometimes a hot shower isn’t always the best way to start your day. Try ending your warm shower by rinsing your hair for the last minute with cold water. This helps to close your cuticle, which will help reduce frizz and give you that glimmering shine. Source: @taraleydon 2. Reach for the right products Hair not cooperating? Many times the problem is simple: you’re using the wrong product for your hair type. If your hair is fine, it’s important to stick with light textures that won’t weight it down. Medium-to-thick hair should focus on adding moisture and styling products to manage their hair without overdoing it or causing build-up, while curly and coily hair types need lots of hydration and should use thick textures and rich products to achieve their desired look. Once you know your hair type, your porosity, and your curl pattern, choosing the right products is much easier. 3. Minimize heat-styling as much as possible If possible, air-drying your hair as much as you can will impact the health of your hair over time, but there are ways to minimize blow drying as well as other heat-styling treatments like curling and straightening. Try creating an easy and fun hairstyle without even touching the blow dryer by adding a frizz-fighting serum or air-dry cream to wet hair and comb through to distribute evenly. BUMBE & BUMBLE Don't Blow It Fine Hair Air-Dry Styler Use this instead of a blow dryer to decrease air-dry time and add volume and body without having to use heat. SHOP NOW If not blow-drying is out of the question, make sure to use a curl-defining cream if you’re a curly girl or a volumizing blow-dry cream with a heat protectant built-in to put your hair in a good place post-blow-dry so you don’t have to do extra styling. CANTU Coconut Curling Cream Define your curls and speed up your blow dry time with this thick, moisturizing cream for curly and coily hair types. SHOP NOW BRIOGEO Farewell Frizz Blow Dry Perfection Heat Protectant Cream Protect your hair from the heat while adding shine, boosting volume, and smoothing all hair types. SHOP NOW BONDI BOOST Heat Protectant Spray Use this any time you're styling with heat tools to protect your hair and keep it healthy and shiny. SHOP NOW For textured hair, this is also a reason why protective styles are so good to lean on because they keep your hair in tip-top shape for longer so you can rely on heat tools less. Source: @menzobolamba 4. Embrace texture Second-day hair is key, but it definitely needs a little zhuzhing. Embrace your natural hair and just add a little extra roughness to it with a dry texture spray. It’ll amp up whatever volume and body you already have, get rid of any unnecessary shine, and hold whatever style you opt for. Flip your head over and spray into hair and through roots. Flip back, and either brush it out or rough it up with your hands. LIVING PROOF Full Dry Volume and Texture Spray Add volume, decrease shine, and prolong your hair with this dry volume and texture spray our editors love. SHOP NOW 5. Add a spritz of perfume Worried about the dirty hair smell? Spray your brush with your favorite fall or winter perfume and run the brush through your hair before you start the day. It’s the easiest way to make your hair seem ultra-alluring and sexy. 6. Don’t touch your hair too much Now that your style is perfect, avoid the urge to flip it, touch it, and play with it all day (we know, it’s impossible). If you want your style to last and your hair to stay in the shiny zone versus looking greasy, touching it constantly will just encourage it to fall and take all that oil and moisture from your hands straight onto your hair. Once you have your perfect style, just rock it and let it be. Want More Like This? Exclusive content delivered straight to your inbox. Related Articles SKIN How to Get Rid of Your Acne Scars, Once and For All MAKEUP Calling All Eyeliner Enthusiasts: Grunge Makeup Is Officially Back BEAUTY Is Prequel’s Affordable Skincare Too Good To Be True? I Put It To the Test NAIL IDEAS 25 Neutral Nail Ideas That Are Anything But Basic BEAUTY The Best Vogue Beauty Secret Videos of 2022 (Plus How To Get the Looks) DECEMBER 29, 2022 written by MCKENNA PRINGLE The Everygirl’s product selections are curated by the editorial team. If you buy something through our links, we may earn an affiliate commission, at no cost to you. We only recommend products we genuinely love. Source: Getty Personally, I’m not really into New Year’s resolutions. I’ll go from 0-100 starting January 1st, stick to my guns for a couple of weeks, then slowly but surely fall off the wagon until the whole “new year, new me” mindset is left to die. But this year, I want to give myself a challenge that I’m genuinely excited to stick to in hopes of actually following through for once. After some consideration and a little self reflection, I’ve decided that the goal of putting more time and effort into my beauty and skincare routine is the winner. And I thought, what better place to start looking for products, tips, and tricks to try out than the Vogue Beauty Secrets videos? SPONSORED BY / BANK OF AMERICA 6 Financial Questions You're Afraid to Ask—Answered by a Top Money Expert From living paycheck to paycheck to managing debt, here are questions and expert answers that can help level up your finance game. CLICK TO READ! After years of doing the exact same thing with my skincare, makeup, and hair every single day, I’m ready to spruce things up in the name of boosting self confidence and having some fun—and I think that’s a very doable resolution we can all set for ourselves. These addicting little vlogs of our favorite celebrities giving us the scoop on their go-to routines are a godsend. Like, yeah, I want my skin to glow like Hailey Bieber’s—give me the 411. So, I did the digging through this year’s best Vogue Beauty Secrets videos to get the looks so you don’t have to. Here’s the 2022 round-up that’ll send us into 2023 looking and feeling like our best selves: 1. Kate Moss’s Guide to Cool-Girl Beauty Iconic supermodel Kate Moss is currently 48 years old and seemingly has skin as perfect as that of a newborn baby. While she touches on a super simple makeup and hair routine (and also some must-have CBD drops, of course) in the video, my ears were wide open as she listed off her go-to skin care products. To my pleasant surprise, nothing she uses was set at an overly unreasonable price point, so I’ll definitely be taking notes in hopes that I can look half as glowy as she does as I age. SANTA MARIA NOVELLA Acqua di Rose Toner SHOP NOW LA ROCHE POSAY Mineral Zinc Oxide Sunscreen SHOP NOW LANEIGE Lip Sleeping Mask SHOP NOW MOUNT LAI Facial Lifting Gua Sha SHOP NOW 2. Never Have I Ever‘s Maitreyi Ramakrishnan’s Guide to Bold Eyeshadow When it comes to makeup for me, eyes have always been the most intimidating part. I usually just throw on some mascara and maybe a singular shimmer shadow if I’m feeling bold, but luckily Actress Maitreyi Ramakrishnan has blessed us with this super detailed, step-by-step guide to easily achieve a full glam eye look. A tip she gave that particularly stood out to me was to only put your pencil eyeliner on the inner third of your water line to give your eyes a pop while avoiding a raccoon eye moment. Thanks, queen. KAT VON D Vegan Eyeshadow Primer SHOP NOW ANASTASIA BEVERLY HILLS Soft Glam Eyeshadow Palette SHOP NOW URBAN DECAY 24/7 Glide-On Waterproof Eyeliner Pencil SHOP NOW HUDA BEAUTY Faux Mink Lashes SHOP NOW 3. Billie Eilish’s Post-Show Beauty Routine I don’t know about you, but I’ll gladly take skin care notes from someone who gets sweaty and oily from playing sold-out arena shows and still has a complexion that looks this good. As Billie Eilish takes us through her post-concert night routine, she can’t stop raving about Los Angeles based facialist Bia de Sousa’s line of skincare products and how her skin “had a complete transformation” when she started using them. She also swears by a go-to product for keeping her intensely color treated hair strong and healthy, which I know my fellow dyed hair gals are always down to hear about. BIBA DE SOUSA Cleansing Gel SHOP NOW BIBA DE SOUSA Daily Moisturizer SHOP NOW BIBA DE SOUSA Hydrating Toner SHOP NOW OLAPLEX No. 6 Bond Smoother Repair Creme SHOP NOW 4. Euphoria’s Storm Reid’s Glowing Skin & Winged Eyeliner Guide Nothing in this world makes me sweat quite like attempting to do winged eyeliner. Almost every tutorial I’ve ever watched makes it look so easy, but the second I get in there with a liquid liner and fine tipped brush, it’s a dumpster fire. But, Storm Reid uses a thicker pencil liner and realistically simple technique that makes even me think, “Oh, I could definitely do that.” On top of that, she talks about the importance of skincare, her must-use products for the job, and