Tools Benefits Case Study Our Technology Resource Company Designs Login Subscribe Chat with us Home / Brands/Retail / News / What are the Top 10 Clothing Brands in America News What are the Top 10 Clothing Brands in America 5 min 182230 views Never Miss a Beat Get weekly email updates from Fashinza to your inbox Subscribe to Email Updates Renowned global designers visit fashion shows to look for inspiration and learn new trends. The New York Fashion Week displayed its Spring Summer 2022 Fashion Trends, wherein fashionistas found new sources and explored different apparel styles. It was held in New York in February 2022, with street-style fashion dominating the red carpet. Fashion shows such as Milan Fashion Week, New York Fashion Week, Arab Fashion Week, and Paris Fashion Week can inspire your business. New fabric manufacturers and textile innovators attend the fashion week in huge numbers as new apparel styles are presented in these garment shows. Top clothing brands in America seek ideas from these fashion shows to finalize the latest designs based on customer demand. American Clothing is heavily influenced by diverse cultures in America, and here are the top 10 clothing brands ruling the country: #1 Nike The United States of America is a powerhouse of sports and fitness in Americans' DNA. Nike is one of the most successful sports clothing brands in the world. It is the top choice of most athletes and fitness enthusiasts. Its annual revenue is $30.6 billion. It is the official and exclusive uniform partner of the NBA, one of the world's best basketball professional leagues. It closed a deal with the NBA worth $1 billion. People from different economic backgrounds like to keep Nike clothes in their closets. Top athletes such as Roger Federer, Christiano Ronaldo, Serena Williams have been the brand ambassadors of Nike. The USP of Nike is its comfortable collection of shoes for professional athletes and fitness enthusiasts in general. They offer their stuff in different colors, and most of their clothing can be customized. #2 Ralph Lauren Ralph Lauren is a popular name in American clothing. Its average annual revenue is USD 7.6 billion. Polo Ralph Lauren's image is the epitome of off-duty splendor, having assumed numerous forms since the brand's launch in 1967. The brand was reappropriated as a mainstay of 90's hip-hop culture after first emerging as a sign of clean-cut American preppiness. Today, it enjoys a reputation encompassing the various peaks of its history. The label's current collection is distinguished by logo-brandished rugby shirts and stately knitwear, catering to both classicists and deadstock-chasing affiliates equally. It is known for its minimalistic approach and core aesthetics, for which customers are willing to pay a reasonable amount. #3 Old Navy Old Navy is affordable and fabulous fashion for Americans. They built their first store in 1994 and became the first retailer to earn a revenue of $1 billion in four years. They are now one of the world's largest garment brands. Old Navy makes clothes for the family. Be it men, women, children, or senior citizens, they have the styles for them all. Their mission is to make the world a better place for future generations by focusing on the three pillars of their Imagine Mission: inclusion, opportunity, and sustainability. The brand's uniqueness lies in offering a variety of American clothing in different price ranges. One can find good clothes starting from $5 to $100. #4 Levi Strauss & Co. In various polls conducted in the USA, Levi’s is the most worn jeans brand in America. It is known for its comfort, style, variety, fit, and colors. Its annual turnover is estimated to be $4.8 billion. Levi's has some soul searching ahead of it as a historical brand in a trend and innovation-driven business. In 2008, It primarily suffered due to weak consumer spending and technological innovations. Levi’s reintroduced specific organizational measures that increased its sales and brand popularity. New targets focus on women's clothing instead of just men's jeans. New stores were opened in untapped markets of India, Russia, and China. The company was also quick in adopting the latest e-commerce trends. "For some reason, they've had a hard time creating their own identity," Christian D. Bruun, the filmmaker of "Blue Gold: American Jeans," said in an interview with Morning Consultant, referring to Levi's. #5 Gap For decades, Gap was one of America's most popular businesses and a symbol of American fashion and style. Thanks to its laid-back basics and legendary denim, the firm became the go-to destination for the casual jeans-and-T-shirt style at an affordable price. Its vivid marketing campaigns were filled with catchy jingles and well-known celebrities, and it was nearly impossible to walk down the street without seeing a Gap sweatshirt during the 1990s and early 2000s. The annual turnover of the company is about USD 6.2 billion. Even though it is a trendy American clothing brand, its sales have declined for 13 months. This is mainly due to its social media presence, especially on Instagram. While it increased their online sales, it led to closing multiple stores and laying off employees. #6 Michael Kors On multiple occasions, Michael Kors has produced exclusive and one-of-a-kind ensembles for a slew of A-list celebrities, including First Lady Michelle Obama. Michael Kors’ costumes and designs have appeared in several notable films and have been mentioned in a number of songs. The annual turnover of the brand is USD 4.4 billion. Their sales have been affected by young clients fading away from luxury brands. Michael Kors, the founder of Michael Kors Holdings Limited, is a well-known philanthropist noted for his extensive charitable efforts in the development of cancer research and his role as the United Nations World Food Programme's Global Ambassador Against Hunger. #7 Coach Coach is a well-known heritage brand with a cult following since the 1990s. Coach offered mid-range luxury items at the time, and its success might be compared to that of other American companies such as Calvin Klein, Guess, and Tommy Hilfiger. The average annual revenue of the company is USD 4.3 billion. Coach was best known for one product – bags – when it was at its peak of popularity in the 1990s. Women carried Coach bags with pride worldwide, flaunting their style and expensive bags to let others know they were on-trend. Coach also creates womenswear, menswear, customized items, and presents in addition to its bags. Every year, the business also hosts a runway show, solidifying its position as a major fashion house. It was a famous luxury brand in 1990, and it still is! #8 Tommy Hilfiger Tommy Hilfiger was the second sibling of nine children, born and brought up in New York. He was heavily inspired and encouraged with sports uniforms. This is not surprising because of the strong sports culture in the USA. The 'preppy' apparel he saw while growing up in Elmira, according to the designer, had a significant effect on him. From the Cleveland Browns' brown and orange against white uniforms to game jerseys with blue and gold flocked scriptwriting, he paid close attention to every detail. The uniform fad had an impact on baseball, football, and basketball. But he never failed to take note of the nitty-gritty of the style. Their collection includes both men's and women's clothing reflecting cool and jazzy styles. The annual revenue of the company is USD 3.6 billion. According to the earnings call, their earnings per share has grown by 20%. Their USP is the cool American brand name that it carries. #9 Under Armour Their annual turnover is USD 3.1 billion, and it is one of the leading sports brands in the USA. According to a Sterne Agee report, Under Armour's sales have increased by 20%, whereas Adidas' combined sales have decreased by 23%. With a combined $8.9 billion in sales this year, industry leader Nike has 46% of the athletic footwear market and a third of the sports apparel market. According to Sterne Agee, Under Armour has been snatching market share in garment sales from its elder German rival and even Nike for months. Under Armour's sports gear sales, which now account for 14% of the market in the United States, have surpassed those of Adidas. Adidas, with a 6% share of the clothing industry, is still the third-largest footwear brand behind Nike and Jordan, with revenues more than double Under Armour's embryonic but increasing footwear sales. #10 Adidas For Adidas, the USA is a huge market even though its bigger competitors like Nike and Under Armour are American brands. Adidas has shifted its strategy and started to "over-invest" in the United States compared to other areas. It began to view the customer through the prism of the United States and North America. The corporation invested heavily in design, development, and other infrastructure in the United States to prioritize goods for that market. It created items exclusively for the US in several circumstances. The company's plan appears to have paid off, at least in the short term. By the end of 2016, Adidas' US sales had increased by 30% year over year. Leading American Clothing brands such as Nike, Levis, Adidas, Gap, etc., have to be up to date to satisfy the needs of their customers. For example, Levi's customers know that slim and straight-fit jeans will be popular this season. They may not buy such pants, though, because Levi's caters to middle-aged, conservative clients, and slim jeans are not a popular choice among that demographic. Whether you are a budding fashion designer or an experienced retailer, having the right knowledge of brands is key in the fashion industry. Fashinza is a B2B apparel manufacturing platform connecting clothing brands with suppliers, vendors, and manufacturers. Our complete ownership of the process from design to delivery ensures that you can rest assured about your products and focus on other aspects of your business. Get in touch with us now! Book a Demo american-clothing fashion-industry Share this Story Discover Data Led Trendy Designs With Fashinza Contact Us Similar Stories Where are Puma Clothes Made? 5 min read 14.5k views What is the Gutermann Thread? 5 min read 5.7k views Fashion News Today - Sustainable Fashion on the Indian Roll! 5 min read 2.5k views 8 Comments Avincius March 30, 2023 You're welcome Corina! Subscribe to our blog for more content on American fashion and clothing brands 2 Load all comments 3rd floor, 91 Springboard, Building number 145, Sector 44, Gurugram - 122003. USA | UAE | India info@fashinza.com Brands Compliances Logistic Logistic cost calculator Sustainability Case Study Cost Calculator ROI Calculator Suppliers Our Smart Factory Logistic cost calculator Resources Fashion Designs Fabric Know Our Products Supply Chain Sustainability Manufacturing Brands/Retail Company Contact Us Meet our team Career News FAQ Design Shirts Womenswear Kids Wear Denim Outerwear Activewear Basic Copyright ©2024 All rights reserved by SelfX Innovations Inc. Privacy Policy | Refund Policy | Terms & Conditions