LinkedIn Articles People Learning Jobs Join now Sign in Top 10 best clothing brands in the world for fashion lovers Top 10 best clothing brands in the world for fashion lovers Business Connect Magazine Business Connect Magazine Business Connect- A magazine of new era for the business community! We Aspire to Inspire! Connecting the Business world! Published Jan 2, 2024 + Follow By Anurag Tiwari The clothes we wear affect the way we feel and how others see us: According to psychology, this is the reason why we like to wear famous brands of clothes. From your old school brands to the big fashion names of today, we have seen the rise of all kinds of clothing brands over the years. In fact, it is difficult to imagine a world of clothing without designer clothing brands. While many of these brands have been around for a long time, there are others that have been around for decades. Out of thousands of active fashion brands across the world, these are the top fashion brands in the world in 2023-24. [caption id="attachment_45636" align="alignnone" width="722"] Top 10 best clothing brands in the world for fashion lovers[/caption] 01 - Nike Nike, Inc. is an American multinational company engaged in the design, development, manufacturing, & worldwide marketing and sales of footwear, apparel, accessories, equipment, and services. Nike is the world's most valuable apparel brand for the seventh year in a row, according to data from the Brand Finance Apparel 50 2021 report. Nike sponsors many high-profile athletes and sports teams around the world, with the highly recognized trademarks of "Just Do It" and the Swoosh logo. 02 - Calvin Klein Established in 1968, Calvin Klein is an American fashion house. It specializes in leather, lifestyle accessories, perfumery, jewellery, home furnishings, watches, and ready-to-wear. The company reached substantial market share in retail and commercial lines as well as haute couture garments. Calvin Klein is a global fashion company that has been in the industry for over fifty years. The brand is known for marketing to fashion lovers by using provocative and minimalistic marketing campaigns that people can't ignore. The main competitors of the brand are Hugo Boss, Tommy Hilfiger, Giorgio Armani, Ralph Lauren, and other luxury brands. However, Calvin Klein tries to keep prices lower than its competitors in order to gain more market share. 03 - Tommy Hilfiger The American premium clothing company Tommy Hilfiger B.V., originally Tommy Hilfiger Corporation and Tommy Hilfiger Inc., manufacturing apparel, footwear, accessories, fragrances, and home furnishings. The company was established in 1985, and the brand's merchandise is sold in department stores and over 2000 free-standing retail stores in 100 countries. The high-quality, urban-chic vibe for men and women is created by Tommy Hilfiger. You'll look trendy instantly whether you decide to wear their classic jeans or one of their colorful button-down shirts. 04 - French Connection French Connection also known as FCUK or fcukis a UK-based global retailer and wholesaler of fashion clothing, accessories, and homeware.It ranks far higher when it comes to quality. In addition to its own stores in the UK, US, and Canada, French Connection also distributes its clothing and accessories through franchise and wholesale arrangements across the world. Today, other brands within the group include Great Plains, Toast, and YMC. Former brands include Nicole Farhi. 05 - Hermès Hermès is an iconic luxury brand founded in 1837. It specializes in leather goods, lifestyle goods, home goods, perfumes, jewelry, watches, and ready-to-wear. According to global brand valuation firm Interbrand, Herms is ranked 28th in Best Global Brands 2024. With a brand valuation of US$18.0 billion, it is behind Louis Vuitton, which is ranked 17th with a valuation of US$31.7 billion. The leather goods and saddlery category is the largest contributor to the company's revenue (50%), followed by ready-to-wear and accessories (23%), and silk and textiles (9%). 06 - GUESS Guess is an American clothing brand that sells both men's and women's clothing. Other fashion items selling by Guess include watches, jewellery, perfumes, bags, and shoes.The company was one of the first to manufacture designer jeans. Guess's denim jeans products were officially launched in late 1981. In 2009, after a three-year legal battle, the Gucci vs. Guess copyright case has been ruled. Gucci has been awarded $4.7 million over the Guess logo and pattern, which Gucci claimed to be direct copies of their trademark. Originally, the Italian brandGucci wanted $221 million. The price tag on Guess products is not as high as other established luxury brands, which means that others may not see Guess as an expensive brand. 07 - Prada Prada is an Italian luxury fashion house founded in 1913 by Mario Prada. The brand value of this company is around $7.3 billion. The revenue of this company is about $ 3.7 billion. It specializes in leather handbags, travel goods, footwear, ready-to-wear (clothes), perfumes, and other fashion accessories. 08 - Lacoste Lacoste is a French company that was established in 1933 by entrepreneur André Gillier and tennis player René Lacoste. It sellsclothing, footwear, sportswear, eyewear, leather goods, perfume, towels, and watches. One of the most known trademarks in the fashion business is the Lacoste green crocodile. Lacoste altered the rules regarding logos on clothes. Lacoste was one of the first brands to put their logo on the outside of the clothing. Lacoste is expensive because theymake good quality products using high-quality materials. Customers choose Lacoste products because it is reliable, comfortable, and offer high quality. 09 - Adidas Adidas is a German multinational corporation, headquartered in Herzogenaurach, that designs and manufactures footwear, clothing, and accessories. After Nike, it is the second-largest sportswear manufacturer in the world and the biggest in Europe. Adidas focuses on urban youth and adults between the ages of 15-36, with brand designs for lifestyle and fashion alongside sports. As they design their products keeping in mind the needs of their customers, they are well known among the youth. 10 - Hollister Hollister is a retail brand owned by Abercrombie & Fitch Co. Products are available in-store and through the company's online store. Hollister currently has stores in Ireland, France, Spain, Sweden, Belgium, Germany, Austria, Poland, Italy, and the Netherlands. In 2024, It was included among the top five teen clothing brands by Piper Jaffray. Its main competitors are American Eagle Outfitters, Aéropostale, rue21, H&M, Gap, Old Navy, and Jack Wills. FAQ Which are the top 10 clothing brands in the world? The top 10 clothing brands in the world are as follows: - Calvin Klein Tommy Hilfiger French Connection Hermès GUESS Nike Prada Lacoste Adidas Hollister Read here: Top 10 clothing brands, India’s top clothing brand, US top clothing brands, which is no 1 clothing brand in the world, and more. Which is no 1 clothing brand in the world? Nikeengaged in the design, development, manufacturing, and worldwide marketing and sales of footwear, apparel, equipment, accessories, and services. Nike is the world's most valuable apparel brand for the seventh year in a row, according to data from the Brand Finance Apparel 50 2021 report.Read here: Top 10 clothing brands, India’s top clothing brand, US top clothing brands, which is no 1 clothing brand in the world, and more. Which country is famous for clothes? According to IPX Brand Countries by IFDAQ, France is the leading country in the fashion industry in the world. France, with over 2,300 index points, was followed by Italy (2,205 points) and the U.S. (1,866 points).Read full article to explore the Top 10 clothing brands, India’s top clothing brand, US top clothing brands, which is no 1 clothing brand in the world, and more Who is the best fashion designer in the world in 2024? The best fashion designer in the world in 2024 are as follows: - Calvin Klein Donatella Versace Ralph Lauren Giorgio Armani Tom Ford Marc Jacobs Domenico Dolce Stefano Gabbana Which are the top 10 Clothing Brands in India? The top 10 Clothing Brands in India are as follows: - FabIndia Mufti Monte Carlo Pepe Jeans Allen Solly Biba Biba Park Avenue Louis Philippe Wrangler Read here: Top 10 clothing brands, India’s top clothing brand, US top clothing brands, which is no 1 clothing brand in the world, and more. Which are the top affordable fashion brands in India? The top affordable fashion brands in India are as follows: - Forever 21 Catwalk Miss Chase H&M Biba Apparels Read here: Top 10 clothing brands, India’s top clothing brand, US top clothing brands, which is no 1 clothing brand in the world, and more. Business Connect Magazine Business Connect Magazine 7,030 followers + Subscribe Like Comment Share 27 1 Comment Harshad Dhuru Property | Real estate 2mo thank u so much for sharing. it's useful information. Like Reply To view or add a comment, sign in More articles by this author Top 10 Entertainment Magazines Available in India Mar 26, 2024 Hurun List 2024 Mar 26, 2024 Tuesday Motivation Mar 26, 2024 IPL 2024 Commencement: Date, Time, Venue, and Schedule Mar 22, 2024 Insights from the community Fashion Design What are the most useful fashion market research reports? Fashion Design How can you communicate your fashion brand's unique value proposition to your target audience? Fashion Design What are the latest consumer insights that can help you design the next fashion trend? Fashion Design How can you identify your fashion niche? Fashion Design How can you predict the longevity of a fashion trend? Fashion Design What do you do if your fashion design career depends on adapting to changing trends and consumer preferences? Show more Others also viewed Women Apparel Market Report, Trends, Size, Growth and Opportunity 2022-2027 Matt Crown 1y Apparel Market Trends and Industry Analysis | 2030: Mobility Foresights Ajay Lokhande 4mo The March/April Issue of director-e is Now Available Online! Hayley Somerscales 7y US Apparel Market Size, Share, Growth 2023-2030 Priya B 3mo How the Fashion Apparel Market 2023 Will Witness Substantial Growth in the Upcoming years 2031 360 Market Updates 4mo Women Apparel Market 2022: Size, Demand, Top Companies, Global Industry Analysis and Forecast to 2027 Aashish Singh 1y Show more Explore topics Sales Marketing Business Administration HR Management Content Management Engineering Soft Skills See All LinkedIn © 2024 About Accessibility User Agreement Privacy Policy Cookie Policy Copyright Policy Brand Policy Guest Controls Community Guidelines Language