Newsletters Sweepstakes NEWS CELEBRITY BEAUTY LIFESTYLE FASHION WELLNESS SHOPPING ABOUT US The Spring 2024 Imagemakers Issue is here! FASHION CLOTHING 13 Going-Out Outfits to Wear This Weekend and Beyond By Julia Guerra Updated on September 27, 2023 @ 08:02PM PHOTO: VALENTINA FRUGIUELE/GETTY IMAGES Whether you have a date night dinner or bottomless brunch on your calendar, planning the perfect going-out look can feel overwhelming. Lucky for you, we have done the heavy lifting by rounding up outfits that run the gamut from sexy to laid-back. With looks ranging from bold colors and prints to more muted tones with eye-catching accessories, planning that girls' night out or rendezvous with your partner just got much easier. First, consider items that you may not currently see as going-out-worthy, such as blazers, trousers, and even that cute suit you don't know what to do with, or consider restyling a beloved maxidress with sneakers or a baseball cap for brunch. Itching to meet-up with friends but dealing with inclement weather? We've got you covered with what you need to decipher your style for a night out on the town. To help get you started, here are our favorite going-out outfit ideas. Try on a Sweater Dress CHRISTIAN VIERIG/GETTY IMAGES Sometimes you have no choice but to encounter the elements on a night or day out, and the sweater dress is your best friend on those occasions. Look for a style that's slightly more body conscious, midi, or maxi for major impact, and embrace winter white if the season calls for it. Restyle a Sweater Vest JEREMY MOELLER/GETTY IMAGES Models like Kendall Jenner, Bella Hadid, and Kaia Gerber have been wearing sweater vests as tops, and the fit is the perfect transition from summer into fall. Pair the knit with mom jeans or wide-leg trousers for a cute but casual look, or for a more nighttime friendly look, pair with a fitted trouser or miniskirt and a sheer blouse underneath. Get a One-Shoulder Top VALENTINA FRUGIUELE/GETTY IMAGES One-shoulder tops are among the most versatile clothing items you can add to your closet as a foundation piece that can be paired with either flared denim, a miniskirt, trousers, or with a blazer in place of traditional outerwear. A top with sheer detailing or sparkle makes it club-appropriate while still providing some coverage. Take a Monochromatic Approach EDWARD BERTHELOT/GETTY IMAGES There's a pop of color, and then there's head-to-toe color. Coordinating sets make the latter both seamless and easy to achieve. Choose your favorite shade and either stick with it throughout the entirety of your outfit (accessories and all) or opt for neutral footwear and minimal jewelry. This is an especially helpful trick during the colder months as more layers are required. Break Out a Romper or Jumpsuit EDWARD BERTHELOT/GETTY IMAGES If you're over dresses and looking for the ease of wearing a one-piece outfit, you may be a candidate for a romper or jumpsuit. Dressier occasions call for adding tights or sheer hose to your romper look. You can also choose a more structured fabric like bouclé or even leather. How to Wear a Romper 10 Different Ways Try on Trousers CHRISTIAN VIERIG/GETTY IMAGES For anyone who prefers to keep their legs covered up, trousers are the answer. These stylish bottoms are comfortable and appropriate for office wear but can also make a splash in metallic, leather, or embellished styles. They can also be dressed up or down with heels or sneakers, a fitted top, or cropped tee. No matter where you're headed, trousers always fit the bill. Don't Fear Patterns JEREMY MOELLER/GETTY IMAGES Wearing complementary mismatched patterns is an easy way to elevate a look and works especially well with luxe fabrics like silk or satin. Try a patterned blouse and trousers or a patterned shirt dress and contrasting patterned tights. Throw on an Oversized Blazer JEREMY MOELLER/GETTY IMAGES You can never go wrong with an oversized blazer. Throw a patterned number over a white T-shirt and jeans for a classic look, or ditch the pants and wear it as a dress with combat boots or an over-the-knee option. Perhaps best of all, it can add modern flair and structure to an otherwise delicate ensemble like a pleated skirt and tee. Choose See-Through Details EDWARD BERTHELOT/GETTY IMAGES A pop of mesh is always a fun pick for date night. But aside from its flirty appeal, the material is also perfect for breezy summer nights. Once the weather gets cool, grab a blazer as you head out the door in case you need to warm your shoulders. A mesh turtleneck also makes a great layering piece, or a dress with see-through mesh details and sparkles is also ideal. Don't Discount Suiting VALENTINA FRUGIUELE/GETTY IMAGES With careful color, material, and accessory selection, a suit can be your ideal option for going out. Look for a soft fabric, a bright or pastel color, and embellishments that keep the look more relaxed and removed from corporate connotations. A breezy blouse, vintage tee, or turtleneck are the ideal complement, as are strappy sandals or a cool pair of sneakers. Go All-In on Cozy Photo by Edward Berthelot/Getty Images. The fun doesn't have to stop because it's winter, but cobbling together a decent outfit to go out in can become exceedingly tricky. Enter: Full-on cozy chic. This is the time to layer up the color and texture, whether that means a striped sweater dress and checkered boots, a statement coat, or a Lenny Kravitz-sized knit scarf. Elevate a Maxidress EDWARD BERTHELOT/GETTY IMAGES Like blazers, maxidresses are never a poor choice when deciding on a going-out outfit. They're a one-and-done ensemble that's comfortable enough to lounge in after the night is through and, depending on your preference, can be dressed up or down with the right accessories (think strappy heels vs. flats, dainty necklaces vs. chunky bracelets, or a mix-and-match of heels and a baseball cap). Upgrade Your Plaid JEREMY MOELLER/GETTY IMAGES Plaid is bound to make a cameo in your wardrobe during fall and winter, but when most think of the checkered pattern, it's in the form of a button-up flannel — something grungy or super casual. However, there are alternative ways to implement plaid into your going-out attire, like gingham blazers or shackets that are often designed to have a more tailored fit, as well as plaid pants, a preppy plaid skirt, and a maxidress or skirt paired with epic boots. Related Articles What to Pack on a Road Trip: The 13 Essentials You'll Need 13 Easy Ways to Style a Pencil Skirt 13 Types of Jackets You Can Wear With a Dress During Any Season How to Style a Maxidress for Every Mood and Occasion 13 Easy Ideas for What to Wear to a Country Concert The 20 Best Blazers That Will Instantly Elevate Any Outfit 15 Effortless Outfit Ideas for a Movie Date Night 20 Chic Ways to Style a Long Skirt for Winter 15 Fancy Outfit Ideas for a Night at the Opera 22 Unexpected Oversized Blazer Outfit Ideas That Score Major Style Points Portia’s 10 Best Outfits From 'The White Lotus' Season 2 10 French Fashion Essentials You Need in Your Wardrobe 8 Cute Super Bowl Outfits to Wear for the Big Game How to Wear Shorts to Work All Summer Long Are You 'Too Old' to Wear That Now? These 18 Trends Prove Style Has No Age Limit 12 Casual Yet Festive NYE Outfit Ideas for a Low-Key Celebration NEWSLETTERS Follow Us NEWS FASHION CELEBRITY BEAUTY HAIR LIFESTYLE POLITICS & SOCIAL ISSUES POP CULTURE SHOPPING About Us Privacy Policy Commerce Guidelines Terms of Service Careers Advertise Diversity & Inclusion Pledge EU Privacy InStyle is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family. Please review our updated Terms of Service.