Hello I'm Abbie! I'm a Virtual Assistant who can help you with questions about Chattanooga College. How can I help you? Programs Financial Aid About Contact Us Talk to an Advisor Hairstyling For Beginners [10 Best Tips To Get You Started] Nov 12, 2021 For those interested in pursuing hairstyling—whether for your personal life or as a career—you might feel uncertain about where to begin. This post will share 10 helpful tips on Hairstyling for Beginners so that anyone interested can begin their journey! 1. Identify your hair type Before you take any steps to style anyone’s hair, you should understand their hair type and its unique needs. A simple breakdown of hair typing notes three main categories: fine, medium, and thick. Furthermore, hair can also be identified by texture—straight, wavy, curly, and kinky. Perhaps you have enough experience with your hair to understand its typing, but for those who don’t, consider this video to help understand hair typing. 2. Familiarize yourself with the appropriate products for your hair type If your hair is thick and curly, you’ll require different products than someone whose hair is fine and straight. Understanding which products best respond to your hair type is key to maximizing your hairstyles’ potential. This article is a great resource for understanding different hair types and their ideal products. 3. Understand the process of product application Once you have begun to implement more styling products into your routine, you’ll become more familiar with how you should apply them and in what quantity. Instructions on the products should help with this, but experience is the best teacher. A gel, mousse, and serum will all be used in unique quantities, so be sure to have a strong grasp of how you should apply these styling products. This guide contains general tips for applying products that should assist any aspiring hairstylist. 4. Have the right tools for the job! A great hairstyle will often require some great hair styling tools. Different hair types will demand different tools for their routines, but there are some accessories that any hair stylist should have. A hairdryer and a selection of hairbrushes are useful for many—if not all—hair types, and it never hurts to have some hair ties and bobby pins on hand. 5. Match the hairstyle to the hair type Fine hair and thick hair will vary in their versatility with hairstyles. Before you begin attempting the incredible hairstyle you saw the other day, understand the possibilities of your hair type and what styles are effective for your hair. For more in-depth guidance on various styles and who they’re best suited for, consider visiting this guide! 6. Prepare with a good haircut A good hairstyle is built on a good foundation, that foundation being the right haircut. Some hairstyles will require a certain amount of design to be paired with further products and tooling, but it’s also good to get a good haircut to establish a nice baseline for your styling desires. This site offers a guide that details how you can prepare for a hairstyling session. 7. Combat Frizz with helpful products Hair frizz is one of the most noted problems people report when discussing their hair experience. Frizz can ruin a well-crafted style quite easily, so preventing this problem is important to keep your hairstyle looking its best. There are many tips to help combat frizz, including sleeping on silk pillowcases, avoiding using hot water on your hair, and maximizing the moisture present in your products. Dry hair is a big contributing factor to frizz, so keeping your hair moisturized and maintained will help preserve your hard-earned style. 8. Curling with confidence Curling can be a scary process, especially for those without a lot of experience. But for those with a desire to add some curls to their repertoire, there are some good general tips you should consider. A ceramic curling iron featuring adjustable heat settings is ideal for helping curl your hair and avoid dangerous heat damage. A video tutorial goes a long way with this process, so consider watching this one for help with your curling adventures! 9. Straightening with success Similar to curling, straightening can also be a bit awkward for some, but there are general tips to help prepare with this process as well. Choosing a ceramic flat iron is a good measure to protect your hair. You can also prepare your hair for the straightening by utilizing products like smoothing shampoos and conditioners, and products that categorize themselves as a “heat protectant.” For more in-depth guidance on the step-by-step process, check out this guide for safe and satisfying hair straightening. 10. Be kind to your natural hair Overworking your hair with various heated styling tools and other accessories can often lead to damage. It is important to be attentive to the state of your hair, so you know when it needs repair or different styling options. Making sure you are using healthy and restorative products on damaged hair and avoiding being too aggressive with styling methods on your healthy hair will ensure that you can achieve the most with your natural hair. Feel empowered to start your hairstyling journey? If you’re thinking about becoming a professional hairstylist, we’d love to chat about your future. Get started here. Posted in All Things Beauty, Cosmetology ← Top 10 Christmas Nails For 2021 How to Become a Facialist [4 Simple Steps] → Programs Aesthetics Cosmetology Dental Assistant Health Science, A.S. Manicuring Medical Assistant Practial Nursing Nursing, B.S. Campuses Main Campus 5600 Brainerd Rd, Suite B38 (423) 305-7781 Satellite Campus 248 Northgate Mall (423) 624-0078 Important Links Talk to an Advisor Request More Info Read Our Blog Privacy Policy Annual Security Report About Us From our first day in 1968 to the present, Chattanooga College has been dedicated to helping students help themselves. We understand the barriers that come with going back to school and work one-on-one with students to break those barriers down together. Chattanooga College MDTC is authorized for operation as a postsecondary educational institution by the Tennessee Higher Education Commission. In order to view detailed job placement and completion information on the programs offered by Chattanooga College MDTC, please view THEC's Authorized Institutions Data. Click THEC icon for more info. 2024 © All rights reserved | Website by Chattanooga College