Phone & Fax +39.0825-582772 HOME TANNERY QUALITY SUSTAINABILITY LEATHER GLOVES BLOG CONTACT US How to wear and combine men’s leather gloves Blog, Gloves / 04/04/2022 / 2 Minuti di lettura Gloves are an accessory that has a thousand-year tradition, used for centuries not only as hand protection, but even as a status symbol. That’s why this accessory very often transforms itself into the focus of entire outfits. It is possible, in fact, to show it off in a different way, depending on the look, situation and style you intend to create. Expert advice for matching men’s leather gloves: Contrasting inside the sleeve of outerwear. Leather gloves is the accessory that gives elegance to the look, hence the importance of creating a color contrast. When wearing a black brown or gray jacket, is enough , in fact, choosing a pair of gloves of a lighter shade to be flawless. With a camel coat, the ideal match is , however, the one with dark gloves. Finally, gloves in pale shades match the dark harmonies of the darkest looks. Combined to shoes and accessories. Wearing matching accessories makes your own look even more sophisticated. That’s why a man who wears boots or lace-ups and a leather bag cannot fail wearing leather gloves of different shade. In fact, leather enhances the look, even in the very refined version with a glossy finish. The slim and high-grip models are perfect to be worn under the sleeve of coats, trench coats and blazers. Tone on tone. Who doesn’t like to dare can always show off gloves of the same color as the other garments and accessories worn, the result will be a sober and chic look. Also, with darker tints it is obtained also a thinning and ennobling effect. Bold gloves above the sleeves. The big and thick gloves, not recommended for the most elegant circumstances, they are perfect during the day. The perfect match is the one with suede jackets, denim jackets, jeans and chino pants. Because of the thickness, they must obviusly be worn in plain sight, becoming the focus of the entire look. Black gloves always and in any case. The black glove goes well with everything, both day and night. This accessory can be considered a passepartout that allows you to be perfect in all circumstances. ← Previous Post Next Post → Potrebbe interessarti anche: Driving gloves: automotive history and fashion Blog, Gloves / 24/02/2014 How to wash leather gloves Blog, Gloves / 10/01/2020 Anteprima by Linea Pelle Blog, Blog, News, News / 01/02/2014 How is a pair of gloves made of Real Italian Leather? Blog, Blog, Gloves, Gloves / 21/03/2019 Articoli recenti Tannery is green! LINEAPELLE 102. Metamorphosis ‘’House of the glove’’ at New York Lineapelle Antonio Siciliano, Business Leader of Made in Italy Premiere Vision Paris: Balance of the first edition in july NUOVA PARTENOPEA PELLI The excellence of made in Italy leather at the service of fashion since 1935! We produce quality leather for gloves, footwear and leather goods REQUEST INFORMATIONS Nuova Partenopea Pelli has been producing high quality leather for leather goods, clothing, footwear and gloves for almost one hundred years using modern and innovative production technologies. Tannery About us Gloves Leather Contact us Blog Legal area Privacy Policy Cookie Policy ©2024 Nuova Partenopea Pelli Srl ~ VAT: IT02654260641 Made with by C+