Home About Us Contact Services Inventory News THE DOS AND DON’TS OF PAIRING JEWELRY WITH CLOTHES Incorporating jewelry into your wardrobe is a great way to add some glamour and sophistication to your look. But pairing jewelry with clothes can be rather tricky at times. Luckily, the experts at our Redwood City jewelry store are here to provide you with all the dos and don’ts of pairing jewelry with clothes. Follow these tips to create a flawless look that even professional fashion consultants would be jealous of. DO MIX AND MATCH Creating a fashion-forward look is somewhat of an art form. Like most things in art, mixing and matching is generally a good thing. Don’t think that the color of your outfit must match the color of your jewelry (although it can). Play around with your look by wearing gold and silver pieces together, combining long and short necklaces and displaying custom designs with more generic pieces. If you’re wary about mixing your jewelry together, wearing a matching set is never a bad choice, either. DON’T GO OVERBOARD It’s easy to get caught up in the beauty of jewelry and think that more is better. But, unless you want the focal point of your outfit to be your jewelry, it’s best to follow the less is more rule of thumb, especially if you’re wearing a more extravagant outfit. If you do wear a fancy outfit, it should be accented with classic pieces such as diamond studs or an understated gold or silver necklace rather than a statement piece. Too much glitz can sometimes be a bad thing. DO DRESS FOR THE OCCASION Think about what impression your outfit is going to give. Extra large hoop earrings paired with business attire doesn’t say “powerful professional,” instead it screams “hot mess.” Make sure your jewelry matches in terms of the level of sophistication and appropriateness. Don’t wear an outfit meant for a glamorous event with jewelry meant for a relaxed evening with friends. While pairing chic and casual can be done, it only works if done right. Use your judgment and ask yourself if your jewelry and clothes send the statement you’re hoping for. DON’T WEAR JEWELRY THAT’S DINGY AND DIRTY No matter how amazing your outfit is, if you wear jewelry that’s dirty or in need of repair, your look won’t dazzle the way you want it to. Instead of enhancing your outfit, dirty jewelry will actually distract from the overall intent of the clothes. Keep your jewelry clean to make the most of your designer duds. Remember, when pairing jewelry with clothes it’s best to pick pieces that you love and that match your overall wardrobe style. Bohemian jewelry paired with a preppy outfit just doesn’t mix well. Take time to think about your style of clothes and pick jewelry that will compliment the outfit rather than distract from it. To find jewelry pieces that will never go out of style, visit our Redwood City jewelry store. We guarantee we have jewelry that will pair perfectly with your individual style. SHARE THIS: More Jackson Square’s Guide: Refurbished Jewelry for Valentine’s Day January 9, 2024 Jackson Square’s Guide: Best Tips for Buying Valentine’s Day Jewelry for a Loved One January 9, 2024 Celebrating Milestones: Selecting Jewelry for Special Occasions November 28, 2023 Reimagined Riches: The Art of Crafting New Jewelry from Old Gold in Redwood City October 17, 2023 Sparkle and Shine: The Importance of Jewelry Polishing and Cleaning September 12, 2023 CONTACT JS RECENT NEWS Jackson Square’s Guide: Refurbished Jewelry for Valentine’s Day January 9, 2024 SUBSCRIBE TO BLOG VIA EMAIL Enter your email address to subscribe to this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email. Subscribe FOLLOW JS ON TWITTER LIKE US ON FACEBOOK Design & SEO by: KM Guru, LLC