STORE ABOUT COMMUNITY SUPPORT SIGN IN 0 Deus Ex™ GOTY Edition 4.9/5 English Offer ends on: 04/04/2024 09:59 EEST -83% 6.99 1.19 Lowest price in the last 30 days before discount: 0.99 Add to cart Buy now Wishlist it Description Deus Ex: Revision, a mod which drastically overhauls the FPS/RPG masterpiece while preserving its greatness, is now available for FREE on GOG.com! In the dystopian future of the year 2052, society slowly spirals into chaos. A lethal virus, the “Gray Death”, ravages the world. The only vaccine, “Ambrosia”, is in such short supply, it is only available to those wealthy enough and deemed “vital to the social order”. With no hope for a cure for the common people, riots occur worldwide and a number of terrorist organizations have formed. As a response, the United Nations has created The United Nations Anti-Terrorist Coalition (UNATCO). You assume the role of JC Denton, a nanotechnologically augmented UNATCO agent. After completing his training, JC gets slowly plunged into the world of augmentations, human misery, and conspiracies, determined to uncover the truth behind the real world order. Deus Ex is an unquestionable masterpiece of a game. With its excellent blending of genres (RPG and FPS), ambitious and multi-layered storyline, and highly interactive and expansive environments it is a "living legend" among gamers. The level of flexibility in character development allows you to follow your own style of gameplay. Stealth, combat, deception, hacking - whatever works, and there is no “best” choice, only “your choice”. Every new implant you install in your body and every skill you invest in counts (except for swimming!) and opens new possibilities. Find out for yourself why Deus Ex is on all those "Greatest Games of All Time" lists. Do you need even more Deus Ex in your life? Then check out our Mod Spotlight for Deus Ex GOTY Edition. 40 “Game of the year” awards, "Excellence in Game Design", and "Game Innovation Spotlight" at the 2000 Game Developers Choice Awards. Expansive environments, ambitious and non-linear storyline, varied gameplay, and great replayability. Moody atmosphere, fast-paced action, and an open world. All this accompanied by an award-winning soundtrack. © Square Enix Limited, 2000 Goodies Manual Soundtrack HD Wallpapers Newspaper Handout Reference Card Avatar System requirements Minimum system requirements: System: Windows 7 Processor: 1 GHz Memory: 256 MB RAM Graphics: 3D graphics card compatible with DirectX 9 ACCEPTANCE OF END USER LICENSE AGREEMENT REQUIRED TO PLAY Please be advised that Windows 10 operating system will receive frequent hardware driver and software updates following its release; this may affect game compatibility Why buy on GOG.COM? DRM FREE. No activation or online connection required to play. Safety and satisfaction. Stellar support 24/7 and full refunds up to 30 days. Time to beat 22.5 h Main 28.5 h Main + Sides 39 h Completionist 27.5 h All Styles Game length provided by HowLongToBeat Game details Genre: Role-playing - FPP - Sci-fi Tags: Story Rich, Role-playing, Atmospheric, Sci-fi, Science, show 8 more... Works on: Windows (7, 8, 10, 11) Release date: June 22, 2000 Company: Ion Storm Inc. / Eidos Interactive Corporation Size: 525 MB Links: Forum discussion Rating: PEGI Rating: 16+ (Drugs, Violence) Game features Cloud saves Single-player Languages English audio text DLCs Deus Ex Revision Free Buy series (2) BUY ALL SERIES FOR 2.38 Deus Ex™ GOTY Edition Deus Ex 2: Invisible War You may like these products Dex -90% 13.69 1.39 Deus Ex: Human Revolution - Director’s Cut -85% 19.99 2.99 System Shock™ 2 -75% 9.99 2.49 Deus Ex: Mankind Divided -85% 29.99 4.50 System Shock -50% 39.99 20.00 Cyberpunk 2077: Ultimate Edition -33% 79.99 53.59 The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim Anniversary Edition -67% 49.99 16.54 Liberated -80% 18.99 3.79 User reviews + Add your review 4.9 /5 overall rating 4.7 /5 verified owners rating 4.6 /5 filters based rating Show: 5 on page Order by: Most helpful OVERALL MOST HELPFUL REVIEW Lambda462 Games: 285 Reviews: 5 Unforgettable. January 18, 2013 Verified owner Deus Ex is a complex First Person RPG developed by Ion Storm and published by Eidos/Square Enix, and you have probably heard of it at some point. It's a first person RPG with remarkable depth in story, gameplay and mostly RPG mechanics. You'll be able to play the game as you please; Kill all people, or play stealthy. You can chose to be a great lockpicker, or you can have heavy weapons to blow doors open. There are multiple ways to finish missions; you can find an airduct and sneak in covertly, hack turrets to have them clean the area out for you, or just go in guns blazin'. The story is also something unforgettable that I wont spoil, but it's deep. Get it, it's only 10,00$, and for that, this true GOG is worth it. Is this helpful to you? yes no (639 of 681 users found this helpful) MercurialJester Games: 225 Reviews: 4 The Game to Play January 26, 2012 Verified owner What else needs to be said about this classic of emergent gameplay. A gritty dystopian cyberpunk setting, a truly enthralling story of international espionage, and gameplay that has to be experienced to be believed. From the very beginning, you're offered a choice, and that's the theme of game from there on in. Choices abound. Do you take the front door to the stronghold, or do you sneak in through the air vent? Are you a run and gunner, or more of a stealth based player? Do you prefer guns, or are you more of a tactical person, turning the enemys tech against themselves? Choices, choices and more choices. Tightly written and excellently paced, this is the way games should be. If you loved Human Revolution, go back to where it all began and experience the original. You owe it to yourself. Read more Is this helpful to you? yes no (343 of 370 users found this helpful) KOC Reviews: 16 Still as relevant as ever January 26, 2012 Verified owner Deus Ex holds a special place in my heart for being the first game to open my eyes to the vast possibilities of story- and character-focused games. At the time that I first played it, it seemed like this was really it: The game that would shape the way of the future by showing everyone what games can be. Not a lot of games have followed suit, however, and that is why Deus Ex is still one of the most relevant Good Old Games. From a design perspective, it is easy to admire for its sheer ambition. Take the first level as an example: You are presented with a massive area surrounding the statue of liberty. You have to get to the top. How do you get there? It's entirely up to you. The designers don't tell one single way to do it, they throw you in there and let you decide for yourself: which Read more Is this helpful to you? yes no (210 of 225 users found this helpful) MaulYoda Games: 37 Reviews: 4 One of the Absolute Bests January 30, 2012 Verified owner There isn't a lot to say about Deus Ex that hasn't been said already, but for those of you who haven't played it, there are two things to keep in mind about it. One, it is undoubtedly one of the best (if not the best) PC games of all time, and one of the greatest games ever made. And two, it's a great game for a number of reasons, but there's one in particular that sticks out. Deus Ex successfully blended the FPS and RPG genres without sacrificing elements of either, something many games attempt to do but very few actually succeed at. The story of Deus Ex sets you in the shoes of JC Denton, an augmented cyborg super agent of sorts who works for the United Nations Anti-Terrorist Coalition (UNATCO). It's a dystopian future where terrorism is rampant, the populace is stricken with a Read more Is this helpful to you? yes no (165 of 178 users found this helpful) Tryzon Games: 80 Reviews: 2 Even the Mona Lisa's falling apart November 13, 2012 Verified owner Some games are so widely adored and imitated that to call them the greatest of all time has become a cliché. This is especially true in the realm of the PC, where even the most obscure gems will develop their own scarily obsessive fans. In the entirety of the medium’s history, few games have been crafted with such clear love, ambition and stubborn determination as the cyberpunk conspiracy simulator that Ion Storm bestowed upon the world and christened Deus Ex. The year is 2052 and the world is a shambles, with huge corporations, Orwellian governments and an apocalyptic plague cheerfully dubbed The Gray Death. JC Denton, an agent for the United Nations Anti-Terrorist Coalition, fresh out of the academy and brimming over with cutting-edge nano-augmentations, is tasked with recovering a Read more Is this helpful to you? yes no (161 of 172 users found this helpful) 2 3 ... 73 Written in English Deutsch polski français русский 中文(简体) Others Written by Verified owners Others Added Last 30 days Last 90 days Last 6 months Whenever After release During Early Access Redeem code Contact us Career opportunities Submit your game Blog Language: English Deutsch Français Polski Pусский 中文(简体) Currency: EUR USD Discover GOG Galaxy Legal Privacy policy Our thanks Cookie Declaration Imprint © GOG sp. z o.o. All rights reserved. All trademarks and registered trademarks are the property of their respective owners. Part of CD PROJEKT group.