This game contains mature content recommended only for ages 18+ By clicking “Continue” below, you confirm that you are aged 18 years or older. Continue Go back to the store STORE ABOUT COMMUNITY SUPPORT SIGN IN 0 SWAT 4: Gold Edition 4.8/5 English Offer ends on: 04/04/2024 09:59 EEST -50% 9.29 4.69 Lowest price in the last 30 days before discount: 4.69 Add to cart Buy now Wishlist it Description SWAT 4: Gold Edition includes both the base game and its expansion, SWAT 4: The Stetchkov Syndicate. It’s not just about the badge, it’s about the rush. The adrenaline is always high as you carry on the legendary SWAT® tradition--leading an elite squad of tactical experts into hard-hitting action that delves deeply into every detail of the experience. In a city rife with armed felons and explosive situations, only the unique skills of your men will do--because when SWAT gets the call, there is no other option. Enter the tense, gritty, explosive world that is business as usual for SWAT®. SWAT 4 gives you easy control over advanced strategic and tactical tools. Plan missions. Deploy your team. Take down dangerous criminals. And in the SWAT 4 Expansion Pack, you get additional weaponry, equipment and even greater challenges. It all adds up to a rush so intense, it could only be SWAT. Exploding with action: 21 intense missions in fully-detailed environments. Vast Arsenal: From deadly assault rifles and powerful shotguns to less-than-lethal stun guns. Advantageous Equipment: Variety of tools available to observe, access, and control situations. Play with Others: Numerous CO-OP and competitive multiplayer modes extend replayability. Quick Mission Maker: Create detailed custom missions for yourself and your friends. © 2005 Activision Publishing, Inc. Activision is a registered trademark and SWAT is a trademark of Activision Publishing, Inc. All rights reserved. The ratings icon is a registered trademark of the Entertainment Software Association. All other trademarks and trade names are the properties of their respective owners. Goodies Manual Expansion Manual Wallpaper System requirements Minimum system requirements: System: Windows XP / Vista / 7 / 8 / 10 Processor: 1.8 GHz Memory: 512 MB RAM Graphics: Nvidia/AMD graphics card compatible with DirectX 9 Storage: 1GB available space Other: Integrated Intel graphics cards are not supported Please Note: SWAT 4: Gold Edition only supports multiplayer connectivity over LAN or direct connection. ACCEPTANCE OF END USER LICENSE AGREEMENT REQUIRED TO PLAY Why buy on GOG.COM? DRM FREE. No activation or online connection required to play. Safety and satisfaction. Stellar support 24/7 and full refunds up to 30 days. Time to beat 9 h Main 12.5 h Main + Sides 17.5 h Completionist 10.5 h All Styles Game length provided by HowLongToBeat Game details Genre: Action - Simulation - Tactical Tags: Action, Simulation, Classic, Tactical, Good Old Game, show 1 more... Works on: Windows (7, 8, 10, 11) Release date: April 5, 2005 Company: Irrational Games / Activision Size: 1.2 GB Links: Forum discussion Rating: PEGI Rating: 18+ (Bad Language, Violence) Game features Multi-player Single-player Languages English audio text Buy series (2) BUY ALL SERIES FOR 10.68 SWAT 3: Tactical Game of the Year Edition SWAT 4: Gold Edition You may like these products Hidden & Dangerous Action Pack -67% 5.99 1.99 Hidden & Dangerous 2: Courage Under Fire -67% 9.99 3.29 The Saboteur™ -75% 18.29 4.59 Police Quest: SWAT 1+2 -35% 9.19 5.99 Delta Force -74% 4.99 1.29 Delta Force: Land Warrior 9.99 Soldiers: Heroes of World War II -76% 4.99 1.19 Delta Force 2 -74% 4.99 1.29 User reviews + Add your review 4.8 /5 overall rating 4.7 /5 verified owners rating 4.6 /5 filters based rating Show: 5 on page Order by: Most helpful OVERALL MOST HELPFUL REVIEW Veloxi Games: 876 Reviews: 24 An Amazing Mix of Tactics and Planning January 24, 2017 Verified owner Some might see this and go, "Isn't this just a Rainbow 6 ripoff?". Oh no, my friends, this is far, far better. In this game you play a member of a tactical SWAT team, and rather than go in, guns blazing, your goal is to be as non-violent/lethal as possible. Sometimes perps don't give you the option, and you have to shoot back, but in each level, their placement and demeanor is randomized, so replayability is astounding. This game is the cream of the crop. The best of the best. Is this helpful to you? yes no (978 of 1020 users found this helpful) Jinxtah Games: 485 Reviews: 11 One of the best tactical shooters ever. January 24, 2017 Verified owner SWAT 4 provides more of the same intense tactical shooter action SWAT 3 had. There's not much of a difference between the two, but if SWAT 3 left you wanting more, buying this game is a no-brainer. Although a little inferior to SWAT 3 in terms of mission design, it still stand as one of the best games in the genre, and you shouldn't hesitate to buy it at full the asking price. Is this helpful to you? yes no (329 of 358 users found this helpful) dabbursennis Games: 31 Reviews: 1 Blast from the past. Literally January 24, 2017 Verified owner I used to play online with some friends of mine, using the stetchkov syndicate mod. Playing as the SWAT team against a few friends on the opposing team, we were about to breach this little town house. I had expressively told my friend not to use the rubber pellet grenade launcher, as it tends to go badly for everyone. Suffice to say, he went with it. I breached the door, he launched his rubber grenade, it bounced off the doorframe and into the garage we were all standing in and exploded, dazing all of us. His teammates. The terrorists walked in, killed us without a fight, and we lost.....Did I mention this happened two more times after that? Great freaking game 10/10. Is this helpful to you? yes no (278 of 322 users found this helpful) Perun.prime Games: 244 Reviews: 2 Feel your self as member of SWAT squad January 24, 2017 Verified owner This is a really Good Old Game, until to this time not available to get in any online store. Feel your self as member and leader of SWAT squad in line of different missions in which you must not rush but carefully think about every step of yours and members of your team, coordinate actions and try not just survive or kill every one but save the hostages and (if you can) get a "bad guys" alive and game reward this. Every time you start some mission, enemy, hostage, traps will locate in different places. And cause of that we have a good replayAbibilty. Add to this customize equipment on every squad member and possibility to equip all team with non lethal weapon (for real hardcore) and you get a real Good Old Game as I've said in the beginning. Is this helpful to you? yes no (200 of 217 users found this helpful) Machinators Reviews: 67 One of the best tactical shooters period January 24, 2017 Verified owner SWAT 4 is the true definition of tactical shooting, in this game you truly feel like a member of the SWAT force. You have a wide range of realistic tools and guns available to you, missions feel tense and rush your adrenaline as every corner could be your last. Successfully clearing rooms of hostiles feels very rewarding, dealing with civilians does too, and they sometimes have funny things to do and say should you choose to capture them or not. Whilst modern games are milking you for money, splitting base game content into "Seasons", this Gold edition is fully complete and is hands-down the best SWAT experience to date. Is this helpful to you? yes no (185 of 206 users found this helpful) 2 3 ... 62 Written in English Deutsch polski français русский 中文(简体) Others Written by Verified owners Others Added Last 30 days Last 90 days Last 6 months Whenever After release During Early Access Redeem code Contact us Career opportunities Submit your game Blog Language: English Deutsch Français Polski Pусский 中文(简体) Currency: EUR USD Discover GOG Galaxy Legal Privacy policy Our thanks Cookie Declaration Imprint © GOG sp. z o.o. All rights reserved. All trademarks and registered trademarks are the property of their respective owners. Part of CD PROJEKT group.