STORE ABOUT COMMUNITY SUPPORT SIGN IN 0 Blasphemous 2 4.4/5 English & 10 more Offer ends in: 2d 21h 30m 20s -40% 29.99 18.02 Lowest price in the last 30 days before discount: 20.14 Edition: Standard Edition Add to cart Buy now Wishlist it Description The second scripture in the Blasphemous series portends the return of The Penitent One, with a story that continues from the free Wounds of Eventide DLC for the original game, where The Heart in the sky heralded the return of The Miracle and foretold the birth of a new miracle child. Awakened in a strange new land, and displaced from his final resting place, The Penitent One is thrust back into the endless cycle of life, death, and resurrection, with no other option than to explore this perilous new world and uncover its long-forgotten secrets. Hordes of grotesque enemies stand in your way, awaiting final judgement by the brutal hand of the Penitent One, with titanic twisted bosses also lurking in the darkness, waiting for their chance to return you to the grave from whence you came. Taking them down won’t be easy, but with Blasphemous 2 offering more chances to customise and improve your skill set, along with several new unique weapons to wield with righteous zeal and unending fury, victory might just be within grasp. Ultimately, only one thing is certain… Penance Never Ends Explore a fuller Non-Linear world Having awoken in a strange new land, your journey starts anew in a series of enchantingly grotesque landscapes, oozing Gothic charm and littered with unforgiving traps. How you tackle the labyrinthian world remains at your discretion, there is no wrong turn to be made, only scores to settle Savage Combat The Penitent One shows no mercy, and with a series of new weapons offering new moves, brutal executions, and expanded combos, destruction will rain on any that stand in his way Customize your playthrough your way Blasphemous 2 offers up new ways to play, with the ability to customise and improve your base skillset, alongside several new unique weapons to unleash devastating attacks on enemies Grand Intense Boss Battles Hordes of monstrous foes stand between you and your goal; twisted bosses with unique attack patters and sundering abilities will put your skills to the test as you fight to stand triumphant when the dust settles Explore a deep new world A whole new world awaits, bustling with mysterious new NPCs to interact with, some will offer aid, some will ask for it, and others will send you on death defying missions to obtain long forgotten items. With so much to see and do, the stories and myths you encounter will help you unpick the games myriad of secrets, granting you a deeper understanding of this strange new world Blasphemous 2. Developed by The Game Kitchen. © 2023. Blasphemous 2 is a trademark or registered trademark of The Game Kitchen. Published by Team17. © 2023. Team17 is a registered trademark of Team17 Digital Limited. Popular achievements Goodies Contents Standard Edition Digital Deluxe Edition Soundtrack (MP3) Soundtrack (WAV) Artbook System requirements Minimum system requirements: Recommended system requirements: System: Windows 10 Windows 10 Processor: Intel Core 2 Duo E8400 or AMD Phenom II X2 550 Intel Core i3-550 or AMD FX-4100 Memory: 4 GB RAM 6 GB RAM Graphics: NVIDIA GeForce GT 520, 1 GB or AMD Radeon HD 7470, 1 GB or Intel HD Graphics 4400 NVIDIA GeForce GT 710, 1 GB or AMD Radeon R7 240, 1 GB or Intel HD Graphics 530 Storage: 4 GB available space 4 GB available space Other: Requires a 64-bit processor and operating system Requires a 64-bit processor and operating system Why buy on GOG.COM? DRM FREE. No activation or online connection required to play. Safety and satisfaction. Stellar support 24/7 and full refunds up to 30 days. Time to beat 15.5 h Main 19.5 h Main + Sides 24 h Completionist 20 h All Styles Game length provided by HowLongToBeat Game details Genre: Action - Metroidvania - Fantasy Tags: Indie, Fantasy, Story Rich, 2D, Great Soundtrack, show 10 more... Works on: Windows (10, 11) Release date: August 24, 2023 Company: The Game Kitchen / Team17 Digital LTD. Size: 2.9 GB Links: Forum discussion Game features Achievements Cloud saves Controller support Overlay Single-player Languages English audio text Deutsch audio text español audio text français audio text italiano audio text português audio text русский audio text 中文(简体) audio text 中文(繁體) audio text 日本語 audio text 한국어 audio text DLCs Blasphemous 2 Original Soundtrack -25% 7.99 5.99 Blasphemous 2 Digital Artbook -33% 7.99 5.39 Critics reviews 84 Top Critic Average 95 % Critics Recommend OpenCritic Rating Game Informer by Brian Shea 8.75/10 At several points in my lengthy journey through the Gothic delight that is Blasphemous 2, I worried the monstrous foe in front of me would spell an end to my journey. But without these frequent frustrations, the triumphs wouldn’t be as great. Blasphemous 2 takes inspiration from those that came before it, but by intertwining a gorgeous art style, enticing exploration, and rewarding combat, it rises above the horde of Castlevania-inspired action titles. GamesRadar+ by Joe Donnelly 4.5/5 stars "Easily the game's crowning features, Blasphemous 2's blockbuster boss showdowns are spectacular affairs, sometimes bizarre and always brutal." IGN by Travis Northup 8/10 Blasphemous 2 is an orthodox Metroidvania with style, creepy bosses, and a gloriously gross return to Cvstodia. Reviews powered by OpenCritic You may like these products Death's Gambit: Afterlife -40% 19.99 11.99 Middle-earth™: Shadow of Mordor™ Game of the Year Edition 19.99 DEADBOLT 9.19 GRIME 24.49 Slain: Back From Hell -85% 11.99 1.85 Blasphemous -75% 24.99 6.29 Dark Devotion 19.99 Alice Escaped! 19.50 User reviews + Add your review 4.4 /5 overall rating 4.6 /5 verified owners rating 4.4 /5 filters based rating Show: 5 on page Order by: Most helpful OVERALL MOST HELPFUL REVIEW _Rubbernuke_ Games: 3 Reviews: 2 Worthy Sequel.....but....... August 30, 2023 I absolutely loved the original, and in many respects Blasphemous 2 surpasses it. The in game pixel art is even better than the first game, the music is top notch and general gameplay is very good. However (this is from 100% completion with endings): Gone is the free flowing nature of B1, and be ready for many, many *many* gates to slam down and waves and waves of enemies to fight...and as the game progresses these get very, very tough. The game relies on too many super obscure clues for quests and endings. The original had this too, but it was easy to figure out and it was limited to one aspect. B2 just throws curveballs over and over, and once again endings require certain things to be done....none of which is really explained ahead of time. This is not to say lead us by the hand, Read more Is this helpful to you? yes no (40 of 44 users found this helpful) wenslydail Games: 150 Reviews: 16 Game Kitchen does it again! August 26, 2023 Verified owner I'll start by saying that if you haven't played the first Blasphemous you don't have to in order to enjoy this game. Though, I highly recommend that you do play the first one as well. This sequel takes the atmosphere, interesting setting, open ended world design, the uniqe/amazing art direction, and solid controls from the first game and makes enough changes to set itself apart from just being more of a good thing. I haven't quite finished it yet, but I'm pretty confident my opinion won't change in the last let of the journey. This game is a banger, if you're looking at the trailer and thinking it looks cool then you won't regret this purchase. If you need more evidence, I almost never buy games day one. I am a hardcore "wait for a sale" enjoyer, and I bought this day one it has been Read more Is this helpful to you? yes no (21 of 22 users found this helpful) SkinnyZi Games: 87 Reviews: 1 Great sequel August 25, 2023 Verified owner Game chefs from The Game Kitchen made beautiful sequel! They've saved loved by many atmosphere. They mix up old and new content and it's works well if you beat the 1st part. If you meet the Blasphemous series from 2nd part don''t afraid - sequel it's self-sufficent story and there not strong links up to 1st part. I'm fully satisfied with new game so far. Is this helpful to you? yes no (18 of 23 users found this helpful) skohl Games: 174 Reviews: 21 Game Kitchen is working hard August 30, 2023 Verified owner I've only played for a couple of hours but I have to leave a review. I'm a big fan of the first game. Two flaws with Blasphemous were the poor balance of the power-ups, and some jankiness in the controls. I can't speak to the former yet, but the latter is very much improved. The delay after landing from a height and after dashing is greatly reduced, so the movement feels a lot smoother. This improvement is expanded for all the controls. One of my favourite parts about the first game and this one is simply how fun it feels to jump, grab ledges, climb, and attack. In this sequel it's even better. It's true there are no more pixel art cutscenes. My understanding was that the devs spent a disproportionate amount of time making those. So, now they are replaced with relatively cheap Read more Is this helpful to you? yes no (7 of 7 users found this helpful) softcode Games: 74 Reviews: 1 Fantastic sequel September 5, 2023 Verified owner Maps are now more interesting and combat is much much more dynamic. Environment art is on another level, even though B1 already looked fantastic. Would love to see more challenging bosses and platforming in the DLCs (they are coming, right?). Is this helpful to you? yes no (1 of 1 users found this helpful) 2 Written in English Deutsch polski français русский 中文(简体) Others Written by Verified owners Others Added Last 30 days Last 90 days Last 6 months Whenever After release During Early Access Redeem code Contact us Career opportunities Submit your game Blog Language: English Deutsch Français Polski Pусский 中文(简体) Currency: EUR USD Discover GOG Galaxy Legal Privacy policy Our thanks Cookie Declaration Imprint © GOG sp. z o.o. All rights reserved. All trademarks and registered trademarks are the property of their respective owners. Part of CD PROJEKT group.