STORE ABOUT COMMUNITY SUPPORT SIGN IN 0 Hellblade: Senua's Sacrifice 4.4/5 English & 19 more Offer ends on: 04/04/2024 09:59 EEST -85% 29.99 4.50 Lowest price in the last 30 days before discount: 4.50 Add to cart Buy now Wishlist it Description From the makers of Heavenly Sword, Enslaved: Odyssey to the West, and DmC: Devil May Cry, comes a warrior’s brutal journey into myth and madness. 2021 Update: Return to Helheim and experience Senua’s world through new eyes with enriched visuals and new features. Upgraded materials, particles and LOD, DirectX Raytracing and optimised performance with NVIDIA DLSS and AMD FSR support. We have also used this opportunity to include some key accessibility improvements, including full controller remapping and colour blindness settings. Set in the Viking age, a broken Celtic warrior embarks on a haunting vision quest into Viking Hell to fight for the soul of her dead lover. Created in collaboration with neuroscientists and people who experience psychosis, Hellblade: Senua’s Sacrifice will pull you deep into Senua’s mind. Accessibility Features: GAMEPLAY - Accessibility options available on launch within the first-boot options menu. - Adjustable combat difficulty between dynamically-adjusted 'Auto' mode, or manually-selected 'Easy', 'Medium', or 'Hard' modes. - Game can be paused both during gameplay and cinematics. AUDIO - Custom volume controls can be adjusted for Master, Music, SFX, Voices, and Menu audio. - Audio output can be adjusted between Stereo and Mono sound modes. VISUAL - Color blind modes, and correction intensities can be adjusted for the included Deuteranopia, Protanopia, and Tritanopia filters. - Subtitles for spoken content can be set to On or Off. - Subtitle text size can be adjusted between 'Standard' or 'Large'. - Subtitle text color can be adjusted between White, Orange, Green, or Blue. - Subtitle backgrounds can be adjusted between Transparent or 'Solid' black. - Text contrast for menu backgrounds can be adjusted between 'Half-Transparent' or 'Solid' black. INPUT - Adjustable input sensitivity for controller joystick and mouse axes, and ability to invert camera axis. - Input remapping for keyboard keys and controller buttons (camera control and menu navigation keys excluded). - Full keyboard support allowing the game to be entirely played with a keyboard (arrow keys replace mouse/right stick movement). - Controller vibration can be set to On or Off. - Running modifier can be set to be activated on key/button Toggle or Hold. Note that the listed accessibility options apply to the Hellblade: Senua's Sacrifice Enhanced on PC version of the game. Note that Hellblade does not support motion controls. System requirements Minimum system requirements: System: Windows 7, 8, 10 Processor: Intel i5 3570K / AMD FX-8350 Memory: 8 GB RAM Graphics: GTX 770 with 2GB VRAM / Radeon R9 280X 3GB | NVIDIA GTX 1080 / AMD Radeon RX 580 for VR Edition DirectX: Version 11 Storage: 30 GB available space Other: Minimum spec screen resolution: 1280x720 To run the game in DX11 mode, in GOG Galaxy choose Settings -> Additional executables -> Hellblade: Senua's Sacrifice (DX11) Why buy on GOG.COM? DRM FREE. No activation or online connection required to play. Safety and satisfaction. Stellar support 24/7 and full refunds up to 30 days. Time to beat 7.5 h Main 8 h Main + Sides 9 h Completionist 8 h All Styles Game length provided by HowLongToBeat Game details Genre: Action - Adventure - Fantasy Tags: Adventure, Action, Indie, Fantasy, Story Rich, show 11 more... Works on: Windows (7, 8, 10, 11) Release date: August 8, 2017 Company: Ninja Theory / Ninja Theory Links: Forum discussion Game features Achievements Cloud saves Controller support Overlay Single-player Languages English audio text Dansk audio text Deutsch audio text español audio text Español (AL) audio text français audio text italiano audio text nederlands audio text norsk audio text polski audio text português audio text Português do Brasil audio text Suomi audio text svenska audio text Türkçe audio text русский audio text العربية audio text 中文(简体) audio text 日本語 audio text 한국어 audio text DLCs Hellblade: Senua's Sacrifice Original Soundtrack -74% 4.99 1.29 Critics reviews 84 Top Critic Average 81 % Critics Recommend OpenCritic Rating Eurogamer by Johnny Chiodini Essential Ninja Theory crafts a highly competent action game and a nuanced, powerful exploration of mental health. IGN by Brandin Tyrrel 9/10 Hellblade: Senua's Sacrifice is a masterclass of atmosphere, storytelling, and the marriage of mechanical and conceptual design. While there are moments that feel shoehorned in to remind us we're playing a videogame, the care and attention Ninja Theory has clearly poured into Senua and her story has created something amazing. This is a game everyone should play, and I'm thankful for the opportunity to have lived inside the mind of Senua, however briefly. Game Informer by Joe Juba 8/10 Given the heavy subject matter, calling Hellblade "entertaining" feels inappropriate. However, it is undeniably memorable, telling a compelling tale that explores subject matter many consider taboo Reviews powered by OpenCritic Buy series (2) BUY ALL SERIES FOR 5.79 Hellblade: Senua's Sacrifice Hellblade: Senua's Sacrifice Original Soundtrack You may like these products God of War 49.99 Lorelai -85% 9.75 1.49 Mark of the Ninja: Remastered -60% 16.79 6.79 Darksiders III - Digital Extras -75% 21.99 5.49 Mafia Trilogy -67% 59.99 19.82 Dreamfall: The Longest Journey -70% 19.99 5.99 Pillars of Eternity: The White March - Expansion Pass -75% 24.99 6.29 Synthwave Burnout -91% 9.99 0.89 User reviews + Add your review 4.4 /5 overall rating 4.3 /5 verified owners rating 4.1 /5 filters based rating Show: 5 on page Order by: Most helpful OVERALL MOST HELPFUL REVIEW CarbonSeed Games: 273 Reviews: 13 A journey into the darkness of the mind August 8, 2017 Verified owner Talk about Senua's Sacrifice is to talk about a different way to make a game. This game backtrack to another time, when the studios made games just like a form of art, not following the mainstream, not pursuing the money, not doing copies of a copies of copies... this is a unique game, the care they put on it is astonishing, is an original game, an experience, you may like it or not, but it's undeniable the fact that today is difficult to find game like this. Because the game try to be innovative, take risks, make decisions that others do not take, plays with the rhythm, with the conventions on videogames... Like I said the things can go wrong at the end, or all the opposite way, but when you see the effort, the passion, the good intentions they put in here... you can feel disappointed in Read more Is this helpful to you? yes no (566 of 646 users found this helpful) majamb Games: 164 Reviews: 1 Story/Immersion August 8, 2017 Verified owner Graphics are good, has been running flawlessly on my system; headphones are a must for this game. Do not buy this if you're looking for a hack n' slash game. This game is heavy on Norse mythology and story. The atmosphere is amazing and details such as facial animation and excellent voice work add that depth. The game has been presented in a linear (for the first hour of play) manner but the pacing has been quite good so far. Is this helpful to you? yes no (260 of 343 users found this helpful) Eraser74 Games: 193 Reviews: 5 This is storytelling at it´s best! August 8, 2017 Verified owner From the very first moments of Hellblade the voice acting, performance capture and writing suck the player into the world of Senua. Best experienced with headphones the voices that are almost constantly in your ear mock you, push you forward or try to hinder your progress. The delivery is flawless. You get sucked into the head of Senua and almost never leave it, only for a few fourth wall breaking moments, when Senua is looking directly at the player and adress the voices that are in her head. The gameplay is solid, fighting is satisfying and on the harder difficulty challenging. The world building is great, the graphics tend to look fotorealistic at times and surreal at others. All in all this is a must have. The surprise hit of the year so far! Is this helpful to you? yes no (213 of 265 users found this helpful) blauwalpate Games: 509 Reviews: 1 An excellent game with annoying flaws August 9, 2017 Verified owner Hellblade is one of the most enjoyable games I've played in 2017 so far, I loved the main character, I loved the story, the visuals and the excellent audio, all reasons to give this game all the five stars it deserves here if it wasn't for two major issues: The combat: Frankly, I think the combat system is the game's weakest part. The fights are very repetitive - you face the same four (or maybe five) basic enemy types over and over again and instead of mixing up their patterns to increase difficulty it just throws more enemies at you. Especially at the end of the game this gets very frustrating because it just takes forever to kill wave after wave of enemies. Some fights are just too long and boring. I understnad the reason for the lack of variety and I think I could live with that if Read more Is this helpful to you? yes no (161 of 191 users found this helpful) ToeSuckingWizard Games: 69 Reviews: 24 They delivered. August 8, 2017 Ninja Theory gives exactly what they promised! Epic story, beautiful visuals, triple a quality. Great experience especially for this price! Is this helpful to you? yes no (148 of 221 users found this helpful) 2 3 ... 86 Written in English Deutsch polski français русский 中文(简体) Others Written by Verified owners Others Added Last 30 days Last 90 days Last 6 months Whenever After release During Early Access Redeem code Contact us Career opportunities Submit your game Blog Language: English Deutsch Français Polski Pусский 中文(简体) Currency: EUR USD Discover GOG Galaxy Legal Privacy policy Our thanks Cookie Declaration Imprint © GOG sp. z o.o. All rights reserved. All trademarks and registered trademarks are the property of their respective owners. Part of CD PROJEKT group.