STORE ABOUT COMMUNITY SUPPORT SIGN IN 0 Baldur's Gate II: Enhanced Edition 3.8/5 English & 8 more Offer ends on: 04/04/2024 09:59 EEST -85% 15.99 2.39 Lowest price in the last 30 days before discount: 2.39 Add to cart Buy now Wishlist it Description Baldur's Gate II: Enhanced Edition includes the classic Baldur's Gate 2 Complete. More information here. The Classic Adventure Continues Baldur's Gate II: Enhanced Edition is the beloved RPG classic, enhanced for modern adventurers. Continue a journey started in Baldur's Gate: Enhanced Edition, or customize a new hero to forge your path. Campaign Content The Enhanced Edition includes the original Shadows of Amn campaign, the Throne of Bhaal expansion, plus brand new challenges in the Black Pits II arena! Classic Campaign: The Original Shadows of Amn Adventure Expansion: Throne of Bhaal New Challenges: The Black Pits II: Gladiators of Thay, arena style battles New Difficulty Setting: Story Mode allows players to focus on story and exploration, rather than combat and survival Epic Characters 11 Playable Classes plus dozens of subclasses Recruit Classic Characters like Minsc and his brave hamster, Boo! 5 New NPCs: Neera the Wild Mage, Dorn Il-Khan the Blackguard, Rasaad yn Bashir the Monk, Hexxat the Thief, and Wilson the Bear New player voice sets to customize your hero Upload Characters from Baldur’s Gate: Enhanced Edition, or forge ahead with a brand new hero Classic Gameplay 2-D isometric graphics Real-time-with-pause combat Adapts 2nd Edition Dungeons & Dragons Rules Enhanced for Modern Platforms Hundreds of bug fixes and improvements to the original game Native support for high-resolution widescreen displays Cross-play multiplayer support for Windows, Linux, and macOS A Story-Rich RPG Kidnapped. Imprisoned. Tortured. The wizard Irenicus holds you captive in his stronghold, attempting to strip you of the powers that are your birthright. Can you resist the evil in your blood and forsake the dark destiny that awaits you? Or will you embrace your monstrous nature and ascend to godhood as the new Lord of Murder? © 2012 - 2013 Overhaul Games, a division of Beamdog. © 2012 - 2013 Hasbro, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Baldur's Gate, Dungeons & Dragons, D&D, the Forgotten Realms, Baldur's Gate, Wizards of the Coast and their logos are trademarks of Wizards of the Coast LLC in the U.S.A. and other countries, and are used with permission. Hasbro and its logo are trademarks of Hasbro, Inc. and are used with permission. © 1998 BioWare Corp. All Rights Reserved. BioWare, the BioWare Infinity Engine and the BioWare logo are trademarks of Bioware Corp. Black Isle Studios and the Black Isle Studios logo are trademarks of Interplay Entertainment Corp. Atari and the Atari logo are trademarks owned by Atari Interactive, Inc. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners Goodies Manual Avatars Wallpapers Manual - Amn Survival Guide Baldur'S Gate II Enhanced Edition V2.5 For 32bit Windows System requirements Minimum system requirements: System: Ubuntu 18.04 or equivalent Processor: Dual Core Processor Memory: 1 GB RAM Graphics: OpenGL 2.0 compatible Storage: 4GB available space Cross-platform multiplayer is supported. Please be advised that Windows 10 operating system will receive frequent hardware driver and software updates following its release; this may affect game compatibility Why buy on GOG.COM? DRM FREE. No activation or online connection required to play. Safety and satisfaction. Stellar support 24/7 and full refunds up to 30 days. Time to beat 45 h Main 81 h Main + Sides 150 h Completionist 82 h All Styles Game length provided by HowLongToBeat Game details Genre: Role-playing - Real-time - Fantasy Tags: Fantasy, Story Rich, Role-playing, Atmospheric, Classic, show 9 more... Works on: Windows (7, 8, 10, 11), Linux (Ubuntu 14.04, Ubuntu 16.04, Ubuntu 18.04), Mac OS X (10.8.0) Release date: November 15, 2013 Company: Beamdog / Beamdog Size: 3.2 GB Links: Forum discussion Game features Cloud saves Co-op Multi-player Overlay Single-player Languages English audio text Deutsch audio text español audio text français audio text italiano audio text polski audio text русский audio text 中文(简体) audio text 한국어 audio text DLCs Baldur's Gate II Enhanced Edition Official Soundtrack -88% 7.99 0.99 Critics reviews 76 Top Critic Average 64 % Critics Recommend OpenCritic Rating Eurogamer by Paul Dean 8/10 It's hard, it's obtuse. It's big, it's beautiful. It's cruel, it's arbitrary. It's an adventure. IGN by Leif Johnson 8.3/10 Baldur's Gate 2 is one of the greatest RPGs ever made, and despite a few bugs, Enhanced Edition is best way to play it. GameSpot by Brett Todd 7/10 Baldur's Gate II retains some familiar flaws, but this enhanced model is one more reason to revisit a classic role-playing game. Reviews powered by OpenCritic Buy series (2) BUY ALL SERIES FOR 6.38 Baldur's Gate: Enhanced Edition Baldur's Gate II: Enhanced Edition You may like these products Icewind Dale: Enhanced Edition -75% 15.99 3.99 Titan Quest Anniversary Edition -75% 19.99 4.99 The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim Special Edition -75% 39.99 10.00 Neverwinter Nights 2 Complete 18.29 The Witcher 2: Assassins of Kings Enhanced Edition -85% 19.99 2.99 Pillars of Eternity: The White March - Part I -75% 14.99 3.79 Pathfinder: Kingmaker - Enhanced Plus Edition -80% 19.99 3.99 Neverwinter Nights: Enhanced Edition -85% 15.99 2.39 User reviews + Add your review 3.8 /5 overall rating 4 /5 verified owners rating 3.3 /5 filters based rating Show: 5 on page Order by: Most helpful OVERALL MOST HELPFUL REVIEW codytracy Games: 111 Reviews: 2 The problems have been fixed! November 6, 2015 Verified owner Please discard the old reviews, the game has been patched up,and works great now. I just started the Throne of Bhaal and experienced no bugs or glitches except for the infamous path finding issues present on all infinity engine games. Don't let the older reviews scare you off, this is by far the best version of the game to play, all of the best mods are built in and you don't have to stretch the screen, widescreen support is built in. I tried modding the old game and it just didn't look right on my widescreen monitor. Support these guys as they are trying to keep the Baldur's Gate series alive! Is this helpful to you? yes no (752 of 945 users found this helpful) DDeKlerk Games: 283 Reviews: 3 Technical update with unwarranted extras October 23, 2018 Verified owner http://www.shsforums.net/files/file/1135-disable-enhanced-edition-npcs/ The above link is to a mod by Argent77 which will disable the new companions. Baldur's gate is one of the best CRPGs ever made and the Enhanced edition adds excellent technical improvements. These updates add a range of options for tailoring your experience and, in most ways, improves the experience. The GOG release also includes the original version. If you are at all a fan of RPGs then do yourself the favour of getting this game. Unfortunately Beamdog, the programmers of the enhanced edition, saw fit to not only improve the technical aspects of the game but also add their own characters. These characters should have been offered in a separate content pack DLC, but instead Beamdog made them a permanent part of Read more Is this helpful to you? yes no (467 of 562 users found this helpful) un2114 Games: 229 Reviews: 1 Includes Original Version of BG2! April 8, 2020 Verified owner GOG is the only digital store that includes the original version of the game with purchase. Please ignore the 1 star reviews because of the dislike for the enhanced edition. You get BOTH enhanced and original at GOG. Yes it sucks you have to buy the enhanced edition if you only want the original version, but GOG is the only legal option. I myself enjoy the enhanced editions and think they are fantastic. BUT if you purchase on GOG, you still get the original version! Thank you GOG! Is this helpful to you? yes no (280 of 319 users found this helpful) bioshark Games: 421 Reviews: 5 Migrating perfection to the 21st century February 23, 2015 Verified owner From my point of view, a gamer that has played both the original and this one, EE is the better game today. I own the retail versions of BG, BGII and IWD and loved playing them back in 2000ish. I've spent tons of hours on those games exploring everything in an age where walkthroughs and the freedom of forums wasn't that wide spread. A few years ago I wanted to get back to the series for old time sake, and after installing the game, I couldn't get past the interface issues. An old game, on my huge 24" screen looks plain ugly, doesn't matter how you look at it. And I hate playing windowed mode. So I skipped playing the game. When the EE version was announced I was very excited and I even pre-ordered it on beamdog (I own both BG titles there). My expectations were exceeded. I just loved Read more Is this helpful to you? yes no (395 of 583 users found this helpful) Suravira Games: 214 Reviews: 10 Terrible NPCs added July 23, 2021 Verified owner The crappy and useless beam dog mods downgrade this masterpiece. Everything added other than their npcs can be done with free online mods which work better. Their NPCs stick out like a sore thumb and are just generally badly written. I only bought this because gog removed the old original page, you can still get the original game added to your account, credit to VADIM_USOVYCH. To do this you go to the game in your shelf and left click on it. Above the big blue gog galaxy download button there are three dropdown tabs, system, language and more. Go into more and there will be an item called SERIAL KEYS, click on this and you will be shown a link. Copy and paste this to a new tab and you can use this code to add the original version of BG1, BG2 and icewind dale to your owned games. Is this helpful to you? yes no (176 of 249 users found this helpful) 2 3 ... 42 Written in English Deutsch polski français русский 中文(简体) Others Written by Verified owners Others Added Last 30 days Last 90 days Last 6 months Whenever After release During Early Access Redeem code Contact us Career opportunities Submit your game Blog Language: English Deutsch Français Polski Pусский 中文(简体) Currency: EUR USD Discover GOG Galaxy Legal Privacy policy Our thanks Cookie Declaration Imprint © GOG sp. z o.o. All rights reserved. All trademarks and registered trademarks are the property of their respective owners. Part of CD PROJEKT group.