Free delivery from €49 (T&C’s apply)** Contact us my zooplus Shopping Basket Dog Cat Small Pet Bird Aquatic + Vet Top Brands Special Offers back zooplus / Dog / Dog Leads & Dog Collars / Poop Bags & Dispensers / Dog Poop Bags - Black Dog Poop Bags - Black 4 Rolls (20 bags per roll) (10) Dog poop bags to refill conventional dog poop bag dispensers. Poop bags are the easy, hygienic way to dispose of dog mess. ...further information Item 4 Rolls (20 bags per roll) 356960.3 €1.49 Add to basket Delivery in 1-5 working days more Return Policy more All prices include statutory VAT. Additional shipping costs may apply. Products you might find interesting zooplus choice Scented Dog Poop Bags €1.49 HAFENBANDE Compostable Poop Bags €6.69 Product description These dog waste bags are the ideal choice for animal lovers and they are a great alternative to most plastic bags which normally take a very long time to break down. Poop bags are hygienic and efficient way to clean up after your dog and are a simple way to keep your environment clean. The sturdy black poop bags are strong enough to let you pick up the mess easily and cleanly, so that it can be safely disposed of. Simply pull one of the tough little bags over your hand like a glove and pick up the waste. Pull the bag back over the waste, tie it up and throw it away in the appropriate container. The black replacement poop bags are available in handy 4 roll packs, 20 bags per roll. The roll fits all conventional poop bag dispensers. Take these poop bags along whenever you take your dog out. The Dog Poop Bags at a glance: 4 rolls, each with 20 bags Bag dimensions: 30 x 22 cm (L x W) Material: HPDP high-density polyethylene Material thickness: 10µm/layer Roll dimensions: diameter 3 x 6 cm Perforated – easy to separate the bags Tough, black material Exclusive to zooplus! Reviews Your pet might also like kooa Biodegradable Dog Poop Bags €4.99 Biodegradable Dog Poop Bags €13.29 Keep Cool Mat €13.99 zooplus choice Rosie's Farm Puppy & Adult Mini Hearts - Turkey individually priced €5.97 Now €4.99 €33.27 / kg Save 10% *RRP= Recommended Retail Price ** Conditions apply 333 zooPoints for subscribing Do not miss out on personalised offers, discounts and coupons! Please select pet type Subscribe Services my zooplus Help Contact Shipping & Delivery Returns Advantages Loyalty Programme Refer a Friend Newsletter zooplus Repeat Shopping Special Offers Clearance Sale Seasonal Specials Choose your country zooplus.com / en Methods of Payment Bank Transfer Delivery Social About Us Careers Corporate Website Imprint Terms & Conditions Withdrawal Form Methods of Payment WEEE Privacy © zooplus SE 2024