enable accessibility | Gift card | Track your order 10,316,479 lives saved. Sign up, earn points, get treats Sign In Treats & Account shop by brand shop by pet Pet Services Sale Featured pharmacy help my store Lucky savings! Check out our March month-long deals. Shop & save > DogFoodFresh & Frozen Food Previous Next Freshpet® Vital™ Grain Free Complete Meals Small Breed All Life Stage Dog Food by Freshpet Item #5278424 Standard Price $9.99 or 4 interest-free payments of $2.50 with Size 1 Lb Flavor Chicken Pick up in store Ready in 2 hours or less Find a nearby store Add to cart Same-day delivery Autoship Not available for this item Ship to me Not available for this item Sign up. Earn points. FREE shipping on orders over $49. Learn more Description Ingredients Directions DESCRIPTION Freshpet Vital Complete Meals Grain-Free Chicken Fresh Small Breed Dog Food features bite-sized pieces of natural chicken and antioxidant-rich sweet potatoes, carrots and cranberries specially crafted for the nutritional and high energy needs of small dogs. Key Benefits: Non GMO dog food, gently cooked with all natural ingredients Specially Crafted for Small Breed Dogs Grain Free, High-Protein, Natural Chicken No Preservatives, Meat Meals or By-Product Meals Vitamin and Antioxidant Rich Vegetables Complete & Balanced for All Life Stages Keep Refrigerated, Use within 7 days of opening Item Number: 5278424 Brand: Freshpet Vital Food Type: Fresh Breed Size: Small Life Stage: All Nutritional Option: Complete & Balanced, Non-GMO, No Soy, No Corn, High-Protein, Fresh Food, Natural, Grain-Free Health Consideration: Allergies, AppetiteStimulator, Constipation, Dehydration, General Health, Sensitive Skin, Sensitive Stomach, Skin & Coat, Weight Control, Shiny Coat, Digestive Care Flavor: Chicken Weight: 1 lb Similar Products Freshpet® Homestyle Creations All Life Stage Dog Food - Fresh, Chicken & Turkey $10.99 -21.49 2 Sizes NOM NOM All Life Stage Frozen Dog Food - Chicken $9.99 -18.99 2 Sizes NOM NOM All Life Stage Frozen Dog Food - Beef $9.99 -18.99 2 Sizes NOM NOM All Life Stage Frozen Dog Food - Turkey $9.99 -18.99 2 Sizes NOM NOM All Life Stage Frozen Dog Food - Pork $9.99 -18.99 2 Sizes PetPlate All Life Stages Fresh Dog Food - Chompin' Chicken Entree, Grain Free $7.49 -18.99 3 Sizes ★★★★★ ★★★★★ 4.7 237 Reviews ϙ 237 Reviews 8 Questions 6 Answers Reviews write a review Rating Snapshot Select a row below to filter reviews. 5★ 200 4★ 20 3★ 7 2★ 4 1★ 6 Average Customer Ratings Overall ★★★★★ ★★★★★ 4.7 Quality 4.8 Value 4.5 Pet Satisfaction 4.7 Most Helpful Favorable Review ★★★★★ ★★★★★ Judie14 · 3 years ago Stomach problems solved I have a 5 lb. Yorkie who gets diareah with most every food product she has been served. The vet hav… Show Full Review 77 of 77 people found this helpful See more 4 and 5 star reviews Most Helpful Critical Review ★★★★★ ★★★★★ ChrislovesZippy · 2 years ago Usually wonderful! Switched my dog to this food recently. He’s super small, has bad teeth so I cut the nuggets into eve… Show Full Review 19 of 19 people found this helpful See more 1, 2 and 3 star reviews 1–8 of 237 Reviews Sort by: Most Helpful ▼ ≡ ★★★★★ ★★★★★ Judie14 · 3 years ago Stomach problems solved I have a 5 lb. Yorkie who gets diareah with most every food product she has been served. The vet have me science diet prescription food for her. The problem was she refused it. She looked at us like we were crazy to think she'd eat that. How much food i bought hoping first she'd eat it, then hoping her stomach would digest it well. Then I discovered fresh pet. Not only will she eat it, she licks the bowl clean. And the only time she ever has an incident is when my son gives her something of what he's eating. Anyone out there who has a dog or cat who has digestive issues, get this product. I LOVE FRESHPET!!!! Received free sample or gift No Recommends this product ✔ Yes Quality Value Pet Satisfaction Helpful? Yes · 77 No · 0 Report ★★★★★ ★★★★★ ccraig27 · 3 years ago She Loved It! Needed a new fresh food after my girl was sick and she loves it. Not only has it helped with her digestive issues, she has stopped scratching too after everything else-food changes, products and medicines did not. Only thing is the food is very hard to find so if you fur baby loves it, don’t run out! Received free sample or gift No Recommends this product ✔ Yes Quality Value Pet Satisfaction Helpful? Yes · 27 No · 0 Report ★★★★★ ★★★★★ Viv334 · 3 years ago Picky eater approved My dog is a PICKY eater. Up until he was about two we had been feeding him solid gold mighty mini dry food (after trying several dry food varieties). We had to free feed because he would never eat enough in one sitting. Then we switched to Farmer's Dog, and he loved that, but it was just too expensive and kind of a hassle when he would sometimes run out before the next shipment. SO we found this and not only is it cheaper, he LOVES it. We have our Alexa remind us each evening to feed him, and you wouldn't believe how excited he gets when he here's the sound now. It's so nice to see him eat all his food every time. Received free sample or gift No Recommends this product ✔ Yes Quality Value Pet Satisfaction Helpful? Yes · 24 No · 0 Report ★★★★★ ★★★★★ caking · 3 years ago Smells great My pup has been picky since day one. Does not like kibble. Wants soft food. Canned was disgusting. So tried this and the rolls too. She loves them and snarfs them down. The ingredients look good not all fake chemical stuff. And as I said, smells like real food. I give her the chunks for breakfast, faster to make. And the roll stuff for dinner mixed with a little kibble for crunch and a little broth to soften the kibble. Yes, she is spoiled but now she eats. I can get a lot of meals out of them so do not feel that I am spending more than good canned food that seems to have gone up in price, along with everything else. Received free sample or gift No Recommends this product ✔ Yes Quality Value Pet Satisfaction Helpful? Yes · 21 No · 0 Report ★★★★★ ★★★★★ ChrislovesZippy · 2 years ago Usually wonderful! Switched my dog to this food recently. He’s super small, has bad teeth so I cut the nuggets into even smaller pieces- he loves it. This most recent purchase, though was unusually hard nuggets. Since I cut them into smaller pieces for him, I know how soft the food is and there was so much hard as dry food- feeling. He couldn’t eat it. Out of the bag more than half was hard and dry nuggets. Disappointing. I picked through it ti find soft ones. Leery about buying it again as it was so soft before- I don’t want to have to deal with it. Received free sample or gift No Quality Value Pet Satisfaction Helpful? Yes · 19 No · 0 Report ★★★★★ ★★★★★ Duckie66 · 3 years ago Doxie food! My dachshunds love fresh pet! They won’t eat anything else! Received free sample or gift No Recommends this product ✔ Yes Quality Value Pet Satisfaction Helpful? Yes · 10 No · 0 Report ★★★★★ ★★★★★ tapR · 3 years ago VItal Small Breed Grain Free Dog Food by Fresh Pet Good quality dog food, improves dogs coat,..only dog food she gobbles up ! Bit expensive, but worth ir and able to afford for a small dog who only eats 2/3 C food a day. Recommends this product ✔ Yes Quality Value Pet Satisfaction Helpful? Yes · 9 No · 0 Report ★★★★★ ★★★★★ Dee60 · 3 years ago Freshpet I have a 15 year old Maltese and she has no teeth. She really enjoys this food and can eat it with out any problems Received free sample or gift No Recommends this product ✔ Yes Quality Value Pet Satisfaction Helpful? Yes · 8 No · 0 Report 1–8 of 237 Reviews ◄ ► Questions ask a question 1–8 of 8 Questions Sort by: ▼ LalaOH · 5 months ago What is the phosphate content? 1 answer Answer this Question Freshpet Consumer Care · 5 months ago Hi, thanks for reaching out. Our Vital Small Breed Meals have 0.58% as fed and 1.39% dry matter amount in phosphorus. If you have any other recipes questions, please feel free to give us a call at 1.866.789.3737, Mon-Fri 8am-11pm ET and Sat & Sun 9am-5pm ET. Kindly reference case number 455104. Thank you. – Jillian Helpful? Yes · 0 No · 0 Report Reese35929 · a year ago Does this have an expiration date? I know to use within 7 days after opening, but what if I wanted to buy 6 bags? Like stock up? 1 answer Answer this Question Freshpet Consumer Care · a year ago All Freshpet recipes come with a Sell by Date. You can safely store the recipe in your refrigerator unopened until that date. While our recipes are made to be served fresh from the fridge, you can feel free to freeze any unused portions upon opening. Keep in mind texture and moisture levels may vary after freezing, but this will not change the nutritional value of the food. For any unopened recipes, it is best to keep it in the refrigerator until the sell by date stamped on the package. Hope this helps! -Angie Helpful? Yes · 1 No · 0 Report DesertRat56 · a year ago How many cups of food are in one bag? Thank you 1 answer Answer this Question Freshpet Consumer Care · a year ago Hi there, our Freshpet Vital Grain Free Complete Meals Small Breed Chicken All Life Stage Dog Food has 3.3 cups per bag. Hope this helps! -Jillian Helpful? Yes · 2 No · 0 Report Jaxx13 · 2 years ago I have a 2 month maltipoo and he is very picky I’ve heard this is good food for puppies but not to sure if I should try it out since it says for adult dogs ? Helpppp is it ok to give it to my two month old puppy ? 1 answer Answer this Question Bless_V · 2 years ago Buy the puppy size. My 4 month old maltipoo can eat the puppy size without problems. Helpful? Yes · 3 No · 0 Report Anonymous · 3 years ago Where can we find it? Not at Targets,(Gastonia) or Ingles in Kings Mountain, nc. When will it be available? These two places always had it! (not now). NEED THIS MY DOGS LOVE IT! large bag of CHICKEN. 1 answer Answer this Question SherryS87 · 3 years ago Giant foods and Weis Markets carry it. Check their website for your area... Helpful? Yes · 1 No · 0 Report jackie288 · 4 years ago Can some of this food be frozen if its not eaten fast enough? 1 answer Answer this Question Trophy Wife 1 · 3 years ago I have frozen both with very good results. When the tube is frozen the packaging will bulge as the liquid expands. This makes for a messy product when the tube is thawed out & served. To avoid having to freeze, I now purchase multiple smaller packages so I can use the entire package within a week. Helpful? Yes · 13 No · 1 Report Anonymous · 8 days ago Will this food be ok with a Yorkie dx with congestive heart failure? 0 answers Answer this Question DN80 · a year ago is this good for 6 week old puppy 0 answers Answer this Question Pet Parents Also Bought Simply Nourish® Original Broth Adult Dog Meal Topper - 8.45 Oz., $2.77$3.99 2 Flavors Merrick Whole Earth Farms Grain Free Wet Dog Food Variety Pack - Chicken/Turkey & Beef $38.99 Simply Nourish® Natural Solutions Gut Health Adult Wet Dog Food - 13 Oz. $3.49 CHI Moisturizing Dry Shampoo for Dogs - 7