Login Store Community Support Change language Get the Steam Mobile App View desktop website © Valve Corporation. All rights reserved. All trademarks are property of their respective owners in the US and other countries. STORE COMMUNITY ABOUT SUPPORT Install Steam login | language Your Store New & Noteworthy Categories Points Shop News Labs All Games > Simulation Games > RimWorld Community Hub RimWorld A sci-fi colony sim driven by an intelligent AI storyteller. Generates stories by simulating psychology, ecology, gunplay, melee combat, climate, biomes, diplomacy, interpersonal relationships, art, medicine, trade, and more. RECENT REVIEWS: Overwhelmingly Positive (1,712) ALL REVIEWS: Overwhelmingly Positive (152,213) RELEASE DATE: 17 Oct, 2018 DEVELOPER: Ludeon Studios PUBLISHER: Ludeon Studios Popular user-defined tags for this product: Colony Sim Base Building Survival Strategy + Sign in to add this item to your wishlist, follow it, or mark it as ignored Is this game relevant to you? Sign in to see reasons why you may or may not like this based on your games, friends, and curators you follow. Sign In or Open in Steam Single-player Steam Workshop Steam Cloud Remote Play on Tablet Family Sharing Partial Controller Support Xbox Controllers Requires agreement to a 3rd-party EULA RimWorld EULA 1 Languages: Interface Full Audio Subtitles English ✔ French ✔ German ✔ Polish ✔ Russian ✔ See all 24 supported languages STEAM DECK COMPATIBILITY Verified Learn more TITLE: RimWorld GENRE: Indie, Simulation, Strategy DEVELOPER: Ludeon Studios PUBLISHER: Ludeon Studios RELEASE DATE: 17 Oct, 2018 Visit the website Tynan Sylvester on Twitter Tynan Sylvester on YouTube View the manual View update history Read related news View discussions Visit the Workshop Find Community Groups Share Embed 87 metacritic Read Critic Reviews Buy RimWorld SPECIAL PROMOTION! Offer ends in 25:41:33 -20% 31,99€ 25,59€ Add to Cart Buy RimWorld Name in Game Pack 47,79€ Add to Cart Buy RimWorld Starter Pack Includes 2 items: RimWorld, RimWorld - Biotech Bundle info -5%-16% 55,48€ 46,63€ Add to Cart CONTENT FOR THIS GAME Browse all (7) RimWorld - Anomaly N/A RimWorld - Biotech 23,49€ RimWorld - Royalty -10% 17,99€ 16,19€ RimWorld - Ideology -10% 17,99€ 16,19€ RimWorld Name in Game Access 14,79€ SEE ALL SHOWING 1 - 5 OF 7 RECENT EVENTS & ANNOUNCEMENTS View All MAJOR UPDATE Announcing the new horror-themed expansion, RimWorld - Anomaly! Update 1.5 now available on the unstable branch. Both Anomaly and update 1.5 release in one month. Anomaly expansion and update 1.5 announced! Wed, March 13, 2024 NEWS Hey everyone! We're excited to announce a limited edition game bundle between RimWorld and Medieval Dynasty running from Feb 15-Feb 22. RimWorld & Medieval Dynasty bundle now available! Thu, February 15, 2024 See all updates (Latest: Mar 13) ABOUT THIS GAME RimWorld is a sci-fi colony sim driven by an intelligent AI storyteller. Inspired by Dwarf Fortress, Firefly, and Dune. You begin with three survivors of a shipwreck on a distant world. Manage colonists' moods, needs, wounds, illnesses and addictions. Build in the forest, desert, jungle, tundra, and more. Watch colonists develop and break relationships with family members, lovers, and spouses. Replace wounded limbs and organs with prosthetics, bionics, or biological parts harvested from others. Fight pirates, tribes, mad animals, giant insects and ancient killing machines. Craft structures, weapons, and apparel from metal, wood, stone, cloth, and futuristic materials. Tame and train cute pets, productive farm animals, and deadly attack beasts. Trade with passing ships and caravans. Form caravans to complete quests, trade, attack other factions, or migrate your whole colony. Dig through snow, weather storms, and fight fires. Capture refugees or prisoners and turn them to your side or sell them into slavery. Discover a new generated world each time you play. Explore hundreds of wild and interesting mods on the Steam Workshop. Learn to play easily with the help of an intelligent and unobtrusive AI tutor. RimWorld is a story generator. It’s designed to co-author tragic, twisted, and triumphant stories about imprisoned pirates, desperate colonists, starvation and survival. It works by controlling the “random” events that the world throws at you. Every thunderstorm, pirate raid, and traveling salesman is a card dealt into your story by the AI Storyteller. There are several storytellers to choose from. Randy Random does crazy stuff, Cassandra Classic goes for rising tension, and Phoebe Chillax likes to relax. Your colonists are not professional settlers – they’re crash-landed survivors from a passenger liner destroyed in orbit. You can end up with a nobleman, an accountant, and a housewife. You’ll acquire more colonists by capturing them in combat and turning them to your side, buying them from slave traders, or taking in refugees. So your colony will always be a motley crew. A nobleman will be great at social skills (recruiting prisoners, negotiating trade prices), but refuse to do physical work. A farm oaf knows how to grow food by long experience, but cannot do research. A nerdy scientist is great at research, but cannot do social tasks at all. A genetically engineered assassin can do nothing but kill – but he does that very well. Each has an opinion of the others, which determines whether they'll become lovers, marry, cheat, or fight. Perhaps your two best colonists are happily married - until one of them falls for the dashing surgeon who saved her from a gunshot wound. You choose whether to land your crash pods in a cold northern tundra, a parched desert flat, a temperate forest, or a steaming equatorial jungle. Different areas have different animals, plants, diseases, temperatures, rainfall, mineral resources, and terrain. These challenges of surviving in a disease-infested, choking jungle are very different from those in a parched desert wasteland or a frozen tundra with a two-month growing season. You're not stuck in one place. You can form a caravan of people, animals, and prisoners. Rescue kidnapped former allies from pirate outposts, attend peace talks, trade with other factions, attack enemy colonies, and complete other quests. You can even pack up your entire colony and move to a new place. You can use rocket-powered transport pods to travel faster. Lovable pets will cheer up sad colonists. Farm animals can be worked, milked, and sheared. Attack beasts can be released upon your enemies. There are many animals - cats, labrador retrievers, grizzly bears, camels, cougars, chinchillas, chickens, and exotic alien-like lifeforms. They respond to hunger and fatigue, witnessing death, disrespectfully unburied corpses, being wounded, being left in darkness, getting packed into cramped environments, sleeping outside or in the same room as others, and many other situations. If they're too stressed, they might lash out or break down. Eye injuries make it hard to shoot or do surgery. Wounded legs slow people down. Hands, brain, mouth, heart, liver, kidneys, stomach, feet, fingers, toes, and more can all be wounded, diseased, or missing, and all have logical in-game effects. And other species have their own body layouts - take off a deer's leg, and it can still hobble on the other three. Take off a rhino's horn, and it's much less dangerous. A peg leg will get Joe Colonist walking after an unfortunate incident with a rhinoceros, but he'll still be quite slow. Buy an expensive bionic leg from a trader the next year, and Joe becomes a superhuman runner. You can even extract, sell, buy, and transplant internal organs. And there's much more than that! The game is easy to mod and has an . Read more at . (All non-English translations are made by fans.) READ MORE SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS Windows macOS SteamOS + Linux MINIMUM: OS *: Windows 7 Processor: Core 2 Duo Memory: 4 GB RAM Graphics: Intel HD Graphics 4000 or other shader model 4.0 Storage: 1 GB available space * Starting January 1st, 2024, the Steam Client will only support Windows 10 and later versions. See all MORE LIKE THIS Against the Storm -35% 29,99€ 19,49€ Timberborn -20% 24,50€ 19,60€ Factorio 32,--€ The Universim -30% 27,99€ 19,59€ ARK: Survival Ascended -20% 44,99€ 35,99€ Dwarf Fortress -15% 28,99€ 24,64€ Oxygen Not Included -66% 22,99€ 7,81€ Farthest Frontier -15% 29,50€ 25,07€ Going Medieval -20% 24,49€ 19,59€ Satisfactory -45% 29,99€ 16,49€ Project Zomboid -33% 19,50€ 13,06€ Jurassic World Evolution 2 -70% 59,99€ 17,99€ View all WHAT CURATORS SAY 1,180 Curators have reviewed this product. Click here to see them. CUSTOMER REVIEWS Overall Reviews: Overwhelmingly Positive (152,213 reviews) Recent Reviews: Overwhelmingly Positive (1,712 reviews) REVIEW TYPE PURCHASE TYPE LANGUAGE DATE RANGE PLAYTIME DISPLAY AS: Summary Most Helpful Recent Funny Show graph Filters Your Languages Showing 110,151 reviews that match the filters above ( Overwhelmingly Positive ) MOST HELPFUL REVIEWS IN THE PAST 30 DAYS Mantis Toboggan M.D. 7 reviews Recommended 340.7 hrs on record (258.2 hrs at review time) POSTED: 3 MARCH Pawn gives birth, it is not a healthy birth, unfortunately the baby passes away. Another pawn has an extreme mental break which results in them digging up a corpse and wanting to show it to everyone. Guess which corpse she dug up and who she showed it to. 11/10 Was this review helpful? Yes No Funny Award 458 people found this review helpful 3 267 people found this review funny 10 34 5 17 Stop Killing Me 1 review Recommended 5,703.3 hrs on record (5,680.0 hrs at review time) POSTED: 13 MARCH After about 5,000 hours played I started to feel like the game was getting a little stale. That's about 1/2 a penny per hour of enjoyment. I would say Rimworld has been the most "value" purchase I've made in my entire life. Was this review helpful? Yes No Funny Award 146 people found this review helpful 15 people found this review funny 4 2 4 Mormesk 677 products in account 17 reviews Recommended 85.9 hrs on record (23.2 hrs at review time) POSTED: 23 FEBRUARY Long time ago when I was still a young kid, in the middle of RTS boom, I had a hope that one day I'll see a video game that isn't focused so much on battle/war aspect, but rather take base building to the extreme where we'll build our own castles, fortresses, defenses and our only goal will be to survive ever-increasing waves of enemies. Years later, long after RTS boom has ended, I've never found my dream game from early childhood. Sure, there were games which were more-or-less about the same concept, like Settlers or Civilization, but it wasn't what I dreamed of, just something that can be considered close enough. There was a Dwarf Fortress as well, but it seemed too awkward even for me. My dream was still unfulfilled. ....until two games came out in 2017 and 2018 - They are Billions and Rimworld, respectively. This review is about the second one, Rimworld. Rimworld is survival-oriented base building management game. While They are Billions matched my initial dream expectations more, I consider Rimworld one of the best games I've ever played, due to the complexity of the simulation, polished and enjoyable gameplay and the fact that there is no run that looks the same, there is always something to improve or to do, and the game doesn't stop to amaze me. I'm deeply shocked how much work and thought was put into Rimworld as a whole, it's clear as day that the devs put a lot of effort and love into this game. Personally I'd love to see only one single thing added - the actual campaign/scenarios that would put us into predefined positions and expect from us to meet certain goal, whether it'd be survival, establishing peaceful relations with some faction or anything else. However, everything in the base game is polished to perfection, and I'm very happy that I've found RimWorld, a game which fulfilled my children dreams of a complex base-building game. I can wholeheartedly recommend this masterpiece to every person that is interested in checking out how a perfect definition of base-building management looks like. I've barely finished a single playthrough during my 80 hours with this game, and I know that it isn't even everything that the game has to offer, let alone consider it finished. This is my current definition of how a good base-bulding game should look like, and I had a lot of fun from every single hour spent with this title, and a lot more to come. READ MORE Was this review helpful?