Solutions Customers Partners Resources Book Demo September 8, 2023eCommerceBy ConnectPOS Content Creator Why Should Online Stores Have The Wish List Function? A wish list sounds so familiar, doesn’t it? It is a popular function that any online store should have on their website. Wishlists have great potential that not everyone is aware of. In this article today, we will tell you how a simple act of online stores have the wish list can greatly benefit your retail business. Table of Contents What Is A Wish List? Why Should We Use Wish Lists? A Tool To Increase Sales And Reduce Cost A Tool To Show Social Proof A Tool To Gather Data A Tool To Foster The Act Of Gifting The Amazon Wish List Example For Gifting Final Words What Is A Wish List? A wish list is a collection of products that customers are interested in and save it to their user account without the immediate intention to buy. Adding products to a wish list is an easy way for shoppers to organize the product priority, making it unnecessary to use the shopping basket for a quick recall which saves customers some time while shopping online. This function helps improve the customer experience while shopping online. Adding products to a wish list is mutually beneficial: it reminds customers of the products they love and help merchants to measure product interest beyond a clear-cut sale. Why Should We Use Wish Lists? A Tool To Increase Sales And Reduce Cost In this digital marketing world, personalization is the differentiating factor of the game. Customers feel appreciated when sellers understand their interests and hobbies. Thanks to wish lists, stores can now know exactly what products a specific customer is interested in and tailor their marketing strategies accordingly, which could save a huge amount of money for business owners. Related articles: What is Netsuite cloud ERP and How does it work? Other than that, instead of generic emails to advertise your store, businesses can send out messages to encourage customers to buy the items on their wish list, which has a much higher chance that customers will come back and finish their purchase. When adding products to a wish list, it means shoppers are already in love with the items but are waiting for a suitable occasion to buy them, or they cannot afford it yet. Retailers can consider attaching discount codes with the emails sent out to increase the conversion rate. A Tool To Show Social Proof In marketing, social proof means providing indecisive buyers with evidence that many other people also love the items they are considering. When setting up their online stores, retailers should consider showing the number of customers who have added a particular item to their wish list next to the item itself. This is a simple way of highlighting the most popular items in an eCommerce store that has a considerably high chance of catching the customers’ attention. It also increases the possibility of getting reviews and shows potential customers that this store is trustworthy as other people are buying here. A Tool To Gather Data When shoppers add products to a wish list, it allows retailers to gain some valuable information: It shows which products are bestsellers so that business owners can reduce the cost of marketing for these items, boost production, stock up inventory, or even implement cross-selling with them. If an item is added to a wish list many times but not bought, retailers should double-check the product for technical problems, usability and prices to see why the conversion rate is low. Related articles: Netsuite Thailand Partner: Unlocking Retail Potential A Tool To Foster The Act Of Gifting A wish list makes shopping online for friends and family so much simpler. Once adding products to a wish list, the creators can send them to their friends or family members before the holidays, birthdays, or any life events. Additionally, if a consumer is unfamiliar with the products of an online store and would like to purchase an item there, adding potential products to a wish list can be the first step. Gathering the items they are interested in and using that list to communicate with the store will save shoppers so much time rather than walking into a physical store and discussing options with a salesperson. The Amazon Wish List Example For Gifting Amazon is one of the first platforms to embrace wish lists for birthdays and holidays. When the idea was first introduced, customers were limited to the products that were carried by Amazon only. Now, adding products to a wish list could not be easier on the world’s biggest shopping platform. With one click, you can add goods from anywhere on the web. The platform keeps your lists organized in alphabetical order. When you send it to other people, it’s easy for them to browse and buy from it with no searching required. Amazon doesn’t send emails to encourage their customers to purchase from their wish lists as they think it is too pushy. Instead, whenever a buyer opens the Amazon app or browses the web, notifications will pop up or similar items will appear to remind them of the items they are already interested in. Related articles: What Is Magento Platform Apart from traditional gifts such as books or CDs, customers can find clothes, cosmetics, furniture, electronics, household items, and even groceries on Amazon. Additionally, if you have a Prime membership, shoppers will get free shipping on most items within 2 to 3 days maximum. Considering the fact that Prime membership is completely free and easy to sign up for, it is highly recommended for Amazon shoppers to have one. The giant eCommerce platform also provides gift-wrapping services, which is significantly convenient for the customers. Normally, after buying the item, customers have to drive to the wrapping services, which are extremely crowded during the holiday season. Therefore, Amazon saves its customers a trip and hours of waiting in line to get their presents wrapped. This is another major factor that boosts customers to use Amazon wish lists to buy gifts on this platform. Final Words Through this article, we have discussed how beneficial it is for retailers to use wish lists and looked at the Amazon wish list example. Looking at how successful Amazon is with its wish list function, it is definitely a role model for businesses to follow. Please feel free to contact us if you have any further questions! ►►► See our products: Magento POS, BigCommerce POS, Shopify POS, Woocommerce POS, NetSuite POS, Commercetools POS, Customize POS, Customer Experience Solution and Next-Gen POS Search posts Categories BigCommerce News 04 Business 70 Commercetools News 01 eCommerce 688 Fashion 01 Industry 322 Insights 336 Magento News 06 NetSuite News 03 New Features 03 News and Events 20 Partnership 11 Point of Sale 728 Shopify News 05 Technology Trend 79 Recent posts 10 Considerations Before Investing in an Apparel Point of Sale Are you seeking the perfect point-of-sale solution for... Uncomplicate Retail: The Power of Apparel Cloud POS Are you tired of juggling multiple systems to... 2024 and Beyond: Exploring the Future of Clothing Store POS Systems The retail landscape is undergoing a transformative shift,... 2 LIKES YOU MAY ALSO LIKE Related Posts JANUARY 7, 2024 How can Facial Recognition work out for your business JANUARY 3, 2024 Shop Like a Boss: International Women’s Day Retail Secrets Revealed DECEMBER 21, 2023 How to Enhance Customer Experience in Ecommerce Platforms Write a comment Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked * Your name * Your email address * Website Your comment Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment. The leading omnichannel solution for retailers © Copyright 2024 ConnectPOS Subscribe to our Newsletter Get latest updates directly to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Resources Blog Case Study Integrations Hardware Knowledge Base Glossary eBook About us About Us Contact Us Free Trial Privacy Policy Terms of Use GDPR Compliance FAQs More products Bigcommerce Backorder Bigcommerce Automation Workplace management platform Meeting room booking Workplace Management