Illnesses and conditions Symptoms and self-help Tests and treatments Healthy living Care, support and rights Scotland’s Service Directory 0 Home Illnesses and conditions Injuries Skin injuries Cuts and grazes Most cuts and grazes are minor and can be easily treated at home. Stopping the bleeding, cleaning the wound thoroughly and covering it with a plaster or dressing is usually all that’s needed. Minor wounds should start to heal within a few days. How to treat cuts and grazes Stop the bleeding Stop any bleeding before applying a dressing to the wound. Apply pressure to the area using a clean and dry absorbent material – such as a bandage, towel or handkerchief – for several minutes. If the cut is to your hand or arm, raise it above your head to help reduce the flow of blood. If the injury is to a lower limb, lie down and raise the affected area above the level of your heart. Clean the wound and apply a dressing When the wound has stopped bleeding, clean it and cover it with a dressing to help stop it becoming infected. To do this: wash and dry your hands thoroughly clean the wound under drinking-quality running tap water – avoid using antiseptic as it may damage the skin and slow healing pat the area dry with a clean towel apply a sterile adhesive dressing, such as a plaster Keep the dressing clean by changing it as often as necessary. Keep the wound dry by using waterproof dressings, which will allow you to take showers. You can remove the dressing after a few days, once the wound has closed itself. Take pain relief if needed If the wound is painful for the first few days, you can take over-the-counter pain relief such as paracetamol or ibuprofen. When to get medical help Phone 111 if: there’s a risk your wound could become infected you think your wound is already infected If your GP is closed, phone 111. A wound is at risk of infection if: it has been contaminated with dirt, pus or other bodily fluids there was something in the wound before it was cleaned, such as gravel or a shard of glass it has a jagged edge it’s longer than 5cm (2 inches) it was caused by an animal or human bite Signs a wound has become infected include: swelling, redness and increasing pain in the affected area pus forming in or around the wound feeling generally unwell a high temperature (fever) of 38C (100.4F) or above swollen glands under the chin or in the neck, armpits or groin An infected wound can usually be successfully treated with a short course of antibiotics. Go to your nearest A&E if: you cannot stop the bleeding you’re bleeding from an artery – blood from an artery comes out in spurts with each beat of the heart, and is bright red and usually hard to control you experience persisting or significant loss of sensation near the wound or you’re having trouble moving any body parts you have received a severe cut to the face – you may require urgent treatment to prevent scarring you have received a cut to the palm of your hand and it looks infected – these types of infection can spread quickly there’s a possibility a foreign body is still inside the wound the wound is very large or the injury has caused a lot of tissue damage In A&E, your wound will be examined to determine whether there’s any risk of infection. You may need a booster injection to prevent tetanus, and your wound may be closed with stitches, strips or special glue before a dressing is applied. If your wound is at risk of infection, it won’t usually be closed because this may trap any infection inside. Instead, it will be packed with a non-sticky dressing before being covered with a protective dressing until it’s safe to close. Source: NHS 24 Last updated: 19 December 2022 Home Illnesses and conditions Injuries Skin injuries How can we improve this page? Other health sites St John Ambulance: Cuts and grazes Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents (RoSPA): home safety St John's Ambulance: First aid advice NHS inform About NHS inform Editorial policy Contact us Webchat Give feedback about NHS inform Info for Me tool Terms and conditions Privacy and cookies policy Freedom of information (FOI) Accessibility Other languages and formats © 2023 NHS 24 – v1.1.1.17852