Health Conditions Discover Plan Connect SUBSCRIBE Inflammation: What You Need to Know Overview Symptoms Causes Diagnosis Home remedies Treatments Takeaway You may experience inflammation due to some health conditions or injury. Long-term inflammation may lead to symptoms that affect your overall health. What is inflammation? Inflammation happens in everyone, whether you’re aware of it or not. Your immune system creates inflammation to protect the body from infection, injury, or disease. There are many things you wouldn’t be able to heal from without inflammation. Sometimes, with autoimmune diseases, like certain types of arthritis and inflammatory bowel disease, your immune system attacks healthy cells. Inflammation is classified into three main types: Acute inflammation: This usually occurs for a short duration but is often severe. Symptoms can appear quickly. However, it typically resolves in 2 weeks or less once the cause (usually injury or infection) subsides. This type restores your body to its state before injury or illness. Chronic inflammation: This type is a slower and generally less severe form of inflammation. It typically lasts longer than 6 weeks. Medical professionals have linked chronic inflammation to autoimmune disorders and even prolonged stress. Subacute inflammation: This is a transformational period between acute and chronic inflammation, and it usually lasts around 2–6 weeks. Symptoms of inflammation 5 signs of acute inflammation heat pain redness swelling loss of function Was this helpful? The specific symptoms you have depend on where in your body the inflammation is and what’s causing it. Long-term inflammation can lead to a number of symptoms and affect your body in many ways. Common symptoms of chronic inflammation can include: body pain constant fatigue and insomnia depression, anxiety, and other mood disorders gastrointestinal issues, like constipation, diarrhea, and acid reflux unintentional weight gain or weight loss frequent infections Symptoms of common autoimmune inflammatory conditions Symptoms can also vary depending on the condition that has an inflammatory component. For example, in some autoimmune conditions, your immune system affects your skin, leading to rashes. In other types, it attacks specific glands, which affect hormone levels in the body. In rheumatoid arthritis, your immune system attacks your joints. You may experience: joint pain, swelling, stiffness loss of joint function limited range of motion In inflammatory bowel disease, inflammation occurs in the digestive tract. Some common symptoms include: diarrhea stomach pain, cramping, or bloating weight loss anemia In multiple sclerosis, your body attacks the myelin sheath. This is the protective covering of nerve cells. You may experience: numbness and tingling of the arms, legs, or one side of the face balance problems double vision, blurry vision, or partial vision loss fatigue cognitive problems, like brain fog Causes of inflammation Many factors can lead to inflammation, such as: chronic and acute conditions certain medications exposure to irritants or foreign materials your body can’t easily eliminate Recurrent episodes of acute inflammation can cause a chronic inflammatory response. There are also certain types of foods that may lead to chronic inflammation. These foods include: sugars refined carbohydrates trans fats alcohol How is inflammation diagnosed? There’s no single test that can diagnose inflammation or conditions that cause it. Instead, based on your symptoms, your doctor may use the following tests to make a diagnosis. Blood tests A few markers can help diagnose inflammation in the body. However, these markers are nonspecific, meaning that abnormal levels can show something is wrong but not what is wrong. Plus, there are no measures that can specifically assess someone for chronic inflammation. Serum protein electrophoresis (SPE) Medical professionals consider SPE to be one way that may confirm chronic inflammation. It measures certain proteins in the blood to identify any issues. Too much or too little of these proteins can point to inflammation and markers for other conditions. C-reactive protein (CRP) CRP is naturally produced in the liver in response to inflammation. A high level of CRP in your blood can occur due to several inflammatory conditions. While this test is sensitive to inflammation, it doesn’t help differentiate between acute and chronic inflammation since CRP will be elevated during both. High levels combined with certain symptoms can help your doctor make a diagnosis. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) The ESR test is sometimes called a sedimentation rate test. This test indirectly measures inflammation by measuring the rate at which red blood cells sink in a tube of blood. The quicker they sink, the more likely you’re experiencing inflammation. A medical professional will rarely perform the ESR test alone as it doesn’t help pinpoint specific causes of inflammation. Instead, it can help a doctor identify that inflammation is occurring. It can also help them monitor your condition. Fibrinogen A fibrinogen test may also help your doctor mark inflammation by noting if your fibrinogen levels exceed the standard. Other blood tests If your doctor believes the inflammation is due to viruses or bacteria, they may perform other specific tests. In this case, your doctor can discuss what to expect with you. Other diagnostic tests If you have certain symptoms, such as chronic diarrhea or numbness on one side of your face, your doctor may request an imaging test to check certain parts of the body or brain. To diagnose inflammatory gastrointestinal conditions, your doctor may perform a procedure to see inside the digestive tract. These tests can include: colonoscopy sigmoidoscopy upper endoscopy Home remedies to reduce inflammation Sometimes, changing your diet can help reduce inflammation. By choosing foods with lower sugar content and trans fats and avoiding certain processed foods, you may start to feel better. Some foods can also fight inflammation. Anti-inflammatory foods berries and cherries fatty fish, like salmon or mackerel broccoli avocados green tea mushrooms, like portobello and shiitake spices, like turmeric, ginger, and clove tomatoes Was this helpful? Check out our guide on how to follow an anti-inflammatory diet. You can further help reduce inflammation by doing the following: Engage in moderate exercise with consistent rest periods. Manage and reduce your stress levels. Quit smoking, if applicable. Treat and manage any preexisting conditions. Other treatment options for inflammation If your inflammation is due to an underlying autoimmune condition, your treatment options will vary. For general symptoms of inflammation, your doctor may recommend several options: NSAIDs and aspirin Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are usually the first line of defense in treating short-term pain and inflammation. You can buy most of these over the counter. Common NSAIDs include: aspirin ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin, Midol) naproxen (Aleve) Prescription varieties also exist, such as diclofenac. Your doctor may prescribe these when treating acute inflammation or certain conditions. NSAIDs can be effective for inflammation, but some interactions and side effects occur, especially with long-term use. Be sure to tell your doctor about other medications you’re taking and if you have any side effects while taking an NSAID. Corticosteroids Corticosteroids are a type of steroid commonly used to treat swelling and inflammation as well as allergic reactions. Corticosteroids typically come as either a nasal spray, oral tablet, injection, or topical. You may wish to follow up with your doctor while taking corticosteroids. Long-term use can cause side effects, and certain interactions may occur. Topical analgesics and other creams Healthcare professionals may recommend topical analgesics for acute or chronic pain since they may have fewer side effects than oral ones. Topical creams and products can contain different medications. Some are prescription only, so it’s best to get advice from your doctor. This is especially the case if you’re treating long-term inflammation, like with arthritis. Some topicals contain an NSAID like diclofenac or ibuprofen. This can be helpful for people with inflammation and pain in a specific body part. Other topical creams may contain natural ingredients that have some evidence of anti-inflammatory properties. The takeaway Inflammation is a natural part of your body’s immune response. However, long-term or chronic inflammation can lead to damaging effects and is associated with some autoimmune disorders. Acute inflammation is a typical part of the healing process. It may occur when you’re experiencing a sore throat or even a small cut on your skin. Acute inflammation should go away within a few days or weeks once the cause is under control. If you’re experiencing any signs of long-term inflammation, you may want to make an appointment with your doctor. They can run some tests and review your symptoms to see if you need treatment for any underlying conditions. Last medically reviewed on February 13, 2024 How we reviewed this article: SOURCES HISTORY Our experts continually monitor the health and wellness space, and we update our articles when new information becomes available. Current Version Mar 26, 2024 Written By Jamie Elmer Edited By Steph Coelho Copy Edited By Ellie-Louise Des Baux Feb 13, 2024 Medically Reviewed By Adam Bernstein, MD, ScD VIEW ALL HISTORY Share this article Medically reviewed by Adam Bernstein, MD, ScD — By Jamie Elmer — Updated on March 26, 2024 More in Understanding Inflammation and Aging Your 5-Minute Read on Inflamm-aging and How to Prevent It Oxidative Stress: Your FAQs Answered Your 5-Minute Read on Fighting Brain Fog What Is Carbon 60 (C60)? Your FAQs Answered Is Carbon 60 (C60) Good for You? VIEW ALL READ THIS NEXT 6 Possible Causes of Brain Fog Brain fog is a symptom of another medical condition. It’s involves memory problems, a lack of mental clarity, and an inability to focus. READ MORE Understanding and Managing Chronic Inflammation Chronic inflammation refers to a response by your immune system that sticks around long after infection or injury. Learn the common symptoms and… READ MORE Everything You Should Know About Oxidative Stress What is oxidative stress, and why does it matter? We explain how this imbalance affects your body and ways to prevent it. READ MORE Get our wellness newsletter Filter out the noise and nurture your inbox with health and wellness advice that’s inclusive and rooted in medical expertise. SIGN UP Your privacy is important to us. Any information you provide to us via this website may be placed by us on servers located in countries outside of the EU. If you do not agree to such placement, do not provide the information. About Us Contact Us Privacy Policy Privacy Settings Advertising Policy Health Topics Medical Affairs Content Integrity Newsletters © 2024 Healthline Media LLC. All rights reserved. Our website services, content, and products are for informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. See additional information. See additional information. AboutCareersAdvertise with us OUR BRANDS Healthline Medical News Today Greatist Psych Central Bezzy