Illnesses and conditions Symptoms and self-help Tests and treatments Healthy living Care, support and rights Scotland’s Service Directory 0 Home Illnesses and conditions Immune system Allergies About allergies Symptoms of allergies Testing for allergies Treating allergies Preventing an allergic reaction About allergies An allergy is a reaction the body has to a particular food or substance. Allergies are very common. They’re thought to affect more than 1 in 4 people in the UK at some point in their lives. They are particularly common in children. Some allergies go away as a child gets older, although many are lifelong. Adults can develop allergies to things they weren’t previously allergic to. Having an allergy can be a nuisance and affect your everyday activities, but most allergic reactions are mild and can be largely kept under control. Severe reactions can occasionally occur, but these are uncommon. Common allergies Substances that cause allergic reactions are called allergens. The more common allergens include: grass and tree pollen – an allergy to these is known as hay fever (allergic rhinitis) dust mites animal dander (tiny flakes of skin or hair) food – particularly nuts, fruit, shellfish, eggs and cow’s milk insect bites and stings medication – including ibuprofen, aspirin, and certain antibiotics latex – used to make some gloves and condoms mould – these can release small particles into the air that you can breathe in household chemicals – including those in detergents and hair dyes Most of these allergens are generally harmless to people who aren’t allergic to them. Symptoms of an allergic reaction Allergic reactions usually happen quickly within a few minutes of exposure to an allergen. They can cause: sneezing a runny or blocked nose red, itchy, watery eyes wheezing and coughing a red, itchy rash worsening of asthma or eczema symptoms Most allergic reactions are mild, but occasionally a severe reaction called anaphylaxis or anaphylactic shock can occur. This is a medical emergency and needs urgent treatment. Read more about the symptoms of allergies. When to get professional advice Pharmacy First Scotland: Allergies treatment from your pharmacy If you have allergies you can get advice and treatment directly from a pharmacy. Find your local pharmacy on Scotland’s Service Directory. Search for a pharmacy near you Getting help for allergies If your pharmacist thinks you might have a mild allergy, they can offer advice and treatment to help manage the condition. See your pharmacist if you think you or your child might have had an allergic reaction to something. The symptoms of an allergic reaction can also be caused by other conditions. Your pharmacist can help determine whether it’s likely you have an allergy. If your allergy is particularly severe or it’s not clear what you’re allergic to, the pharmacist may advise you see your GP who may refer you to an allergy specialist for testing and advice about treatment. Read more about allergy testing. How to manage an allergy In many cases, the most effective way of managing an allergy is to avoid the allergen that causes the reaction whenever possible. For example, if you have a food allergy, you should check a food’s ingredients list for allergens before eating it. The Food Standards Agency has more information about food allergen labelling. There are also several medications available to help control symptoms of allergic reactions, including: antihistamines – these can be taken when you notice the symptoms of a reaction, or before being exposed to an allergen to stop a reaction occurring decongestants – tablets, capsules, nasal sprays or liquids that can be used as a short-term treatment for a blocked nose lotions and creams, such as moisturising creams (emollients) – these can reduce skin redness and itchiness steroid medication – sprays, drops, creams, inhalers and tablets that can help reduce redness and swelling caused by an allergic reaction For some people with very severe allergies, a treatment called immunotherapy may be recommended. This involves being exposed to the allergen in a controlled way over a number of years, so your body gets used to it and doesn’t react to it so severely. Read more about treating an allergy and avoiding allergic reactions. What causes allergies? Allergies occur when the body’s immune system reacts to a particular substance as though it’s harmful. It’s not clear why this happens, but most people affected have a family history of allergies or have closely related conditions such as asthma or eczema. The number of people with allergies is increasing every year. The reasons for this are not understood, but one of the main theories is it’s the result of living in a cleaner, germ-free environment, which reduces the number of germs our immune system has to deal with. It’s thought this may cause it to overreact when it comes into contact with harmless substances. Part 2 Symptoms of allergies Source: NHS 24 Last updated: 13 November 2023 Home Illnesses and conditions Immune system How can we improve this page? Also on NHS inform Self-help guide: Hay fever Allergic rhinitis Anaphylaxis Food allergy Other health sites Allergy UK Anaphylaxis Campaign Search for a pharmacy near you Enter a place or postcode NHS inform About NHS inform Editorial policy Contact us Webchat Give feedback about NHS inform Info for Me tool Terms and conditions Privacy and cookies policy Freedom of information (FOI) Accessibility Other languages and formats © 2023 NHS 24 – v1.1.1.17852