Better Health Channel Our websites Conditions and treatments Healthy living Services and support A-Z Search Home Surgery Surgery Listen Print Summary Read the full fact sheet Generally speaking, surgery involves cutting or otherwise penetrating the body’s tissues. Ask your doctor or surgeon about the benefits, risks and possible side effects of surgery – if in doubt, seek a second opinion. On this page The aim of surgery Emergency or planned surgery The seriousness of surgery The surgical approach Where to get help Generally speaking, surgical procedures involve cutting or otherwise penetrating the body’s tissues. There are many different types of surgery. All have benefits, risks and possible side effects. Ask your doctor or surgeon for more information to help you decide about treatment. This is known as ‘informed consent’. Your health professional has a duty to explain the kind of operation you will undergo and any other options that are available to you. They should also clearly explain about any dangers and risks. If in doubt, seek a second opinion. The aim of surgery Surgeries can be grouped according to their purpose. For example: Diagnosis – surgery can establish whether a person has a particular illness, disease or condition. Diagnostic surgery may be recommended when the person has signs that something may be wrong – for example, they may report unusual symptoms. An example of diagnostic surgery is a breast lump biopsy. Prevention – the removal of tissue to stop a disease from happening. An example of this type of surgery is an operation to remove bowel polyps that may turn cancerous if left untreated. This type of surgery is also called prophylactic surgery. Ablation – means the surgical destruction (ablation) of tissue. Reconstruction – the aim is to restore use (such as knee reconstructive surgery) or improve appearance (such as breast reconstruction following mastectomy). Sometimes, reconstructive surgery achieves both. For example, a cleft palate repair enhances the person’s appearance and also improves their ability to eat, swallow and talk. Transplantation – this is surgery to replace a body part that no longer works properly: for example, a hip replacement or a lung transplant. The part may be artificial (made from silicone, stainless steel or titanium) or natural (donated from an organ donor). Palliative care – the aim is to reduce pain, control symptoms and improve quality of life when there is no chance of cure. An example of this type of surgery is nerve resection to stop a person from feeling constant pain. Emergency or planned surgery Surgery is part of a continuum of care and is often defined as either ‘emergency’ or ‘planned’ surgery. Emergency surgery is surgery to treat trauma or acute illness following a presentation to an emergency department, or an emergency admission directly to the ward. Planned surgery (also known as elective surgery) refers to planned surgical procedures that can be booked in advance. Patients requiring planned surgery in the public system are added to a waiting list and assigned a category (1, 2 or 3) to reflect the clinically recommended waiting time for their specific procedure. Find out more about planned surgery. The seriousness of surgery All surgery carries risk to the person. The factors that determine the degree of risk include the body part that is affected, the seriousness of the medical condition, the extent of surgery, the complexity of surgery and the expected recovery time. Categories include: Major surgery – such as surgery to the organs of the head, chest and abdomen. Examples of major surgery include organ transplant, removal of a brain tumour, removal of a damaged kidney or open-heart surgery. The person will need to stay in hospital for some time. The risk of complications may be high and the person will take a longer time to recover. Minor surgery – presents a low risk of complications and fast recovery time. Examples of minor surgery include sewing up a cut or biopsy of a breast lump. The surgical approach Surgeries can be categorised by broad technique. For example: Open surgery – the traditional approach. The surgeon makes a large single incision to access the internal organs. An example is open-heart surgery. Open surgery of the abdominal cavity is known as laparotomy. Keyhole surgery – the surgeon makes several small cuts (incisions) instead of one large one. Slender surgical instruments are passed through these incisions, including a laparoscope. This is a special viewing tube fitted with a light so the surgeon can see the internal organs. For this reason, keyhole surgery is also known as laparoscopic surgery. Where to get help Your GP (doctor) Your surgeon Your nearest hospital emergency department In an emergency, call triple zero (000) NURSE-ON-CALL Tel. 1300 60 60 24 – for expert health information and advice (24 hours, 7 days) References This page has been produced in consultation with and approved by: Related Pages Hospitals, surgery and procedures Planned surgery (elective surgery) Day surgery Decisions about surgery Best care guidance for non-urgent elective surgery Was this page helpful? Yes No View all surgery Related information Hospitals, surgery and procedures Planned surgery (elective surgery) Day surgery Decisions about surgery Best care guidance for non-urgent elective surgery From other websites External Link The Royal College of Surgeons of England UK Content disclaimer Content on this website is provided for information purposes only. Information about a therapy, service, product or treatment does not in any way endorse or support such therapy, service, product or treatment and is not intended to replace advice from your doctor or other registered health professional. The information and materials contained on this website are not intended to constitute a comprehensive guide concerning all aspects of the therapy, product or treatment described on the website. All users are urged to always seek advice from a registered health care professional for diagnosis and answers to their medical questions and to ascertain whether the particular therapy, service, product or treatment described on the website is suitable in their circumstances. The State of Victoria and the Department of Health shall not bear any liability for reliance by any user on the materials contained on this website. Reviewed on: 25-05-2023 Health topics Conditions and treatments Healthy living Services and support Explore Videos Service profiles Consumer medicine information Multilingual health information - Health Translations Directory About About us Accessibility Content partners Privacy Terms of use Contact us Connect with us Facebook X (formerly Twitter) YouTube Instagram The Victorian Government acknowledges Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people as the Traditional Custodians of the land and acknowledges and pays respect to their Elders, past and present. The Department of Health celebrates, values and includes people of all backgrounds, genders, sexualities, cultures, bodies and abilities. This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.