We use cookies and other identifiers to help improve your online experience. By using our website you agree to this. To learn more, including how to change your settings, see our cookies policy. Ok UNICEF Parenting is now on WhatsApp JOIN English Français Español العربية Visit UNICEF Global High contrast Parenting QUICK LINKS SIGN UP CHILD DEVELOPMENT CHILD CARE HEALTH FOOD AND NUTRITION Page Mental health and well-being How to support your children and yourself. UNICEF/UN0202850/Pancic Available in: English Français Español العربية Our mental health is a fundamental part to our overall health and well-being. As a parent, you play a huge role in supporting your child's mental well-being. Nurturing and loving care build a strong foundation, helping your child to develop the social and emotional skills they need to lead a happy, healthy and fulfilled life. Here are expert tips and resources to help you support your child's and your own mental health. Let's get started Take our quiz on mental health Conversation starters Common conditions explained Infants to pre-teens | Teenagers | Parents Guides to big conversations Take the mental health quiz #OnMyMind: How to talk to your child about mental health It starts with one moment, one conversation, one question: What’s on your mind? Explainer 0–5 years Lay the foundation for a lifetime of positive mental health in this period of growth and learning Read now Explainer 6–10 years Starting school, navigating friendships and building resilience – the focus shifts to the outside world Read now Explainer 11–13 years Physical changes, appearances and friendships – there is much to navigate in this challenging time Read now Explainer 14–18 years How to tackle emotional, behavioural and health risks that could influence the rest of their lives Read now Back to top Mental health: Common conditions explained Learn about common mental health terms and conditions and how to support your family’s well-being. Explainer What is stress? A common feeling that affects children as much as adults, just differently Read now Explainer What is anxiety? Feelings of anxiety among children are preventable and treatable Read now Explainer What is depression? Recognize signs of low mood and depression in children and learn ways to help them feel better Read now Explainer What is postpartum depression? Learn about the signs and how to find support Read now Explainer What are panic attacks? Understanding the triggers is the first step to helping your child overcome the condition Read now Explainer What is toxic stress? Learn what to look for and when to seek help Read now Explainer What is self-harm? Why children hurt themselves and ways to help them overcome the impulse Read now Back to top Mental health and infants to pre-teens Help lay the foundation for a lifetime of positive mental health. Video How to build your baby's mental health A psychologist's tips on helping your child to feel safe and protected Watch now Article How play strengthens your child’s mental health Playful moments are essential for your little one’s emotional well-being Read the story Article How to manage your child’s separation anxiety What you need to know about supporting your little one Read the story Article How to discipline your child the smart and healthy way Positive discipline works and here's how you can put it into practice Read the story Back to top Mental health and teenagers Support your child through this time of growth into adulthood. Article Four things you can do to support your teen’s mental health Show your teen love and care, while looking after yourself Read the story Article 11 tips for communicating with your teen How to approach conversations with empathy and understanding Read the story Article Teen mental health and social media We asked mental health experts how they approach social media in their families Read the story Article Teens and risky behaviour How to support your teen while helping them to stay safe Read the story Article How to help your teenager manage a meltdown Be your child’s partner in navigating difficult or overwhelming feelings Read the story Article How to support your teen during stressful times Be your child’s partner in navigating tough situations Read the story Article When to help your teen find mental health support Learn about the warning signs and how to guide your child Read the story Video What are eating disorders? Learn about eating disorders and what parents should watch out for Watch now 3 ways to support your teen Dr. Lisa Damour shares her quick, practical tips on how to support your teen. Video 3 ways to help motivate your teen A psychologist shares her tips for parents Watch now Video 3 ways to help your teen build self-confidence Laying the foundation for a happy and fulfilling life Watch now Video 3 ways you can help your teen express emotions Expert tips on how to support your teen Watch now Video 3 ways to help get your teen to open up A psychologist shares how to encourage your teen to share what’s on their mind Watch now Back to top Caregivers and self-care When we take care of ourselves, we can better take care of our children as well. Article Self-care for parents How mental health experts with kids look after their own well-being Read the story Explainer How to reduce stress Simple, proven ways for parents to manage stress Read now Article How to protect your family's mental health A psychologist answers your top questions about family well-being Read the story Back to top Guides to big conversations Article Busted: 7 myths about mental health Separating fact from fiction Read the story Article Talking to your kids about racism While there is no one-size-fits-all approach, the earlier parents start the conversation the better. Read the story Explainer How to talk to your children about hate speech How to help your child recognize hate speech and know what to do when they encounter it Read now Explainer How to talk to your child about climate change Ways to engage children on the issue with hope and positivity Read now Article How to talk to your children about conflict and war 8 tips to support and comfort your children Read the story Article How to talk to your children about the death of a loved one Helping your children cope with loss, grief and painful feelings Read the story Explainer Bullying: What is it and how to stop it How to prevent and deal with bullying Read now Link Cyberbullying: What is it and how to stop it What teens want to know about cyberbullying Visit the site Back to top COVID-19 How to protect your child's mental health from the pandemic. Article How the pandemic has affected your child's mental health Advice from an expert psychologist on supporting your child Read the story Link Support through COVID-19 losses A psychologist's advice on helping your children process loss and grief during the coronavirus pandemic. Visit the site Video How to talk to your child about school anxiety Is your child having a hard time being back in the classroom? Dr. Hina Talib shares tips on how to help them cope Watch now Link 3 self-care tips for parents during COVID-19 Showing self-care is a good way of modelling the practice to your children Visit the site LOAD MORE ITEMS Back to top UNICEF Parenting Child development Developmental milestones Child care Food and nutrition Health About UNICEF parenting Discover more about UNICEF Where we work Take action for children Contact us Legal Report fraud, abuse, wrongdoing