Illnesses and conditions Symptoms and self-help Tests and treatments Healthy living Care, support and rights Scotland’s Service Directory 0 Home Illnesses and conditions Infections and poisoning Common cold A cold is a very common mild viral infection. You can often treat a cold without seeing a GP. You should begin to feel better in about 1 to 2 weeks. There is a separate page on if your child has cold or flu symptoms. Symptoms of a cold The main symptoms of a cold include: a sore throat a blocked or runny nose sneezing a cough a hoarse voice generally feeling unwell Less common symptoms of a cold include: high temperature (fever) – this is usually about 37°C to 39°C (98.6°F to 102.2°F) a headache earache – severe earache may be a sign of a middle ear infection muscle aches loss of taste and smell mild irritation of your eyes a feeling of pressure in your ears and face When to get medical advice Speak to your GP practice if: your symptoms do not improve after 3 weeks your symptoms get suddenly worse your temperature is very high or you feel hot and shivery you’re concerned about your child’s symptoms you’re feeling short of breath or develop chest pain you have a long-term medical condition – for example, diabetes, or a heart, lung or kidney condition you have a weakened immune system – for example, because you’re having chemotherapy If your GP is closed, phone 111. Speak to a pharmacist if you have a cold and would like advice and treatment. Find your local pharmacy Treatment for a cold There’s no cure for a cold, but there are things you can do to look after yourself at home. You should begin to feel better in about 1 to 2 weeks. Things you can do to help your symptoms Do rest drink plenty of fluids eat healthily take over-the-counter pain relief, such as paracetamol or ibuprofen, to relieve high temperature and aches use decongestant sprays or tablets to relieve a blocked nose try remedies such as gargling salt water and sucking on menthol sweets Always read the leaflet that comes with your medicine before taking it. Follow the recommended dosage instructions. If you’re not sure which treatments are suitable for you or your child, speak to a pharmacist for advice. Be careful not to use cough and cold medicines if you’re taking paracetamol and ibuprofen tablets. Cough and cold medicines often also contain paracetamol and ibuprofen so it can be easy to take more than the recommended dose. How do colds spread? A person can start spreading a cold from a few days before their symptoms start until their symptoms have gone. You can catch the virus from an infectious person by: touching an object or surface contaminated by infected droplets and then touching your mouth, nose or eyes touching the skin of someone who has the infected droplets on their skin and then touching your mouth, nose or eyes breathing in tiny droplets of fluid that contain the cold virus – these are launched into the air when an infected person coughs or sneezes Different viruses can cause a cold. It’s possible to have different colds one after the other, as each one may be caused by a different virus. How to prevent a cold from spreading Do wash your hands often, especially before touching your nose or mouth and before handling food always sneeze and cough into tissues throw away used tissues straight away and wash your hands clean surfaces regularly use your own cup, plates, cutlery and kitchen utensils do not share towels or toys with someone who has a cold Is it a cold or flu? It can sometimes be difficult to tell if you have a cold or flu, as the symptoms can be similar. The main differences are that flu symptoms: come on quickly usually include a headache, high temperature (fever) and sore muscles make you feel too unwell to continue your usual activities Cold symptoms: come on slowly mainly affect your nose and throat are fairly mild, so you can still get around and are usually well enough to go to work What’s the difference between a cold and flu? Complications of a common cold Colds usually clear up without causing any further problems. But the infection can sometimes spread to your chest, ears or sinuses. Source: NHS 24 Last updated: 01 March 2024 Home Illnesses and conditions Infections and poisoning How can we improve this page? Also on NHS inform If your child has cold or flu symptoms Search for a pharmacy near you Enter a place or postcode NHS inform About NHS inform Editorial policy Contact us Webchat Give feedback about NHS inform Info for Me tool Terms and conditions Privacy and cookies policy Freedom of information (FOI) Accessibility Other languages and formats © 2023 NHS 24 – v1.1.1.17852