Explore ucihealth.org Live Well Home wound care do’s and don’ts October 30, 2018 | UCI Health Is it best to cover the wound or let it breathe? That depends, says a UCI Health family practitioner. Cut, scrape or puncture the skin and our bodies immediately begin to heal the wound. When it comes to animal bites, cuts deeper than a quarter inch or those that bleed excessively, people should see a doctor, says UCI Health family medicine specialist Sara Etemad, MD. But many minor injuries can be treated at home by observing a few rules to prevent infection and ensure complete healing. First, it’s helpful to understand the stages of the body’s natural healing process, says Etemad, who sees patients at UCI Health — Tustin. Stages of wound healing Blood begins to clot and a scab begins to form. White blood cells help to ward off infection and begin to repair the damaged tissue and any broken blood vessels. Red blood cells create collagen to form a base for new tissue to grow in the wound. New skin forms over this tissue, and as the edges pull inward, the wound gets smaller. A scar forms, strengthening the area over the wound. To boost this natural healing process, cleansing the wound is the first priority. Etemad offers the following advice: Do this to promote healing Immediately irrigate the wound with water by holding it under the tap and wash the area with gentle soap then pat dry. Small cuts and scrapes can be left uncovered, but moisture is usually needed to help speed up the healing process. Apply petroleum jelly (Vaseline) and cover with an adhesive bandage any exposed wounds that might become dirty on the hands, feet, arms or legs. For people who are sensitive to adhesive, a gauze pad can be secured with paper tape. Cleanse the wound daily with soap and water, and apply fresh petroleum jelly and a bandage. Once the wound has healed, apply sunscreen with an SPF of at least 30 to control scarring. Don’t do this to your wounds Don’t apply a topical antibiotic. Studies show that petroleum jelly is just as effective as an antibiotic ointment for non-infected wounds. Don’t douse a minor wound with antiseptics like iodine or hydrogen peroxide. They’re actually harmful to the skin and can delay healing. Most minor cuts and scrapes will heal in a matter of days. But some wounds are at a higher risk of infection and may need a topical antibiotic. If you are unsure about your wound, it's a good idea to seek medical attention. Etemad says it’s also important to know when to get medical treatment. When to see your doctor Animal bites Cuts or punctures from a rusty or dirty object, because you may need a tetanus shot Wounds deeper than a quarter inch, that won’t stop bleeding after keeping direct pressure on the injury for over 5 minutes Wounds with jagged or far apart edges that can't be brought together easily and may require stitches or skin glue Wounds on the face that may need special attention for cosmetic reasons Signs of serious infection, such as when the wound is red, warm or painful to touch, draining pus or is surrounded by red streaks Remember to cleanse your wound daily with gentle soap and water, apply petroleum jelly and cover it with an adhesive bandage for faster healing, Etemad says, adding, "And if you have any questions or are unsure about your wound, come visit us at our Tustin office." Related stories What's in your first-aid kit? › Home burn care do's and don'ts › Emergency room or urgent care? › Tags urgent care health tips View by Category Health Tips COVID-19 Patient Stories Breakthroughs Aging Cancer Brain and Nerve Health Digestive Health Heart Health Men's Health Parenting Women's Health Recipes Connect With Us Classes & Events UCI Health offers dozens of classes, seminars and support groups to help you live well. Take a class, join a group or attend a lecture, and allow us to be your partner in well-being. See all classes and events › Browse by Topic health tips cancer prevention nutrition recipes patient stories breakthroughs aging digestive health brain womens health weight loss heart health covid 19 viruses senior health clinical trials infections kids health mental health vaccines primary care eye fitness holidays immunizations parenting pain stroke breast cancer Newsletter Sign Up Sign up for the Live Well blog newsletter › Patients MyChart Login Find a Provider Medical Services Classes & Events Clinical Trials Health Library Insurance Medical Records Physicians Refer a Patient Transfer a Patient Provider Directory Continuing Medical Education Visitors Visit UCI Medical Center Parking Contact a Patient Dining Gift Shop Visiting Hours Waiting Areas Donate Blood About Us About UCI Health Careers Maps & Directions Giving Volunteer Opportunities News & Events Publications Virtual Tour Contact Us Connect with Us Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram Pinterest LinkedIn Subscribe UCI Health | 101 The City Drive South • Orange, CA 92868 | 714-456-7890 中文 | Español © 2024 The Regents of the University of California. All rights reserved. UCI Health is affiliated with CHOC Children's Hospital of Orange County About Us | Patient Privacy | Website Privacy Policy | Disclaimer