Support for your mental health Explore Health Conditions Discover Plan Connect SUBSCRIBE Affective Disorders Types Symptoms Causes Diagnosis Treatment Takeaway What is an affective disorder? Affective disorders are a set of psychiatric disorders, also called mood disorders. The main types of affective disorders are depression and bipolar disorder. Symptoms vary by individual and can range from mild to severe. A psychiatrist or other trained mental health professional can diagnose an affective disorder. This is done with a psychiatric evaluation. Affective disorders can be disruptive to your life. However, there are effective treatments available, including both medication and psychotherapy. Types of affective disorders The two main types of affective disorders are depression and bipolar disorder. Each includes subtypes and variations in severity. Depression Depression is a medical term that describes ongoing feelings of extreme sadness and hopelessness. It’s more than simply feeling down for a day or two. If you have depression, you may experience episodes that last for several days or even weeks. It’s estimated that more than 264 million people worldwide live with depression, which can take on multiple forms. The most common types of depression include: Major depressive disorder (MDD). Previously called clinical depression, MDD includes long-term and persistent episodes of low mood, hopelessness, fatigue, and other symptoms. Persistent depressive disorder. Also called dysthymia, this type of depression is characterized by less severe depression symptoms occurring for at least 2 years. Major depressive disorder with seasonal patterns. Commonly known as seasonal affective disorder (SAD), this subtype of depression most often occurs during the winter months when there’s less daylight. There are also certain types of depression experienced by females, due to hormonal changes at various life stages. Examples include perinatal depression during pregnancy and postpartum depression after birth. Some women also experience depression alongside other symptoms of premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD). It is possible for men to experience postpartum depression as well, though this isn’t associated with hormonal changes like in women. Sometimes depression can also develop as a secondary condition to an underlying medical issue. Some issues include: chronic pain syndrome diabetes thyroid disease heart disease lupus rheumatoid arthritis multiple sclerosis Parkinson’s disease Bipolar disorder Bipolar disorder is a mental health condition where a person experiences extreme shifts in mood. These mood changes may include episodes of depression along with periods of mania or hypomania. There are different types of bipolar disorder. They include: Bipolar I. Bipolar I is defined by episodes of mania that last for at least 7 days. You may also experience depressive episodes that last for 2 weeks or more, though depression may not occur in bipolar I. Bipolar II. This type includes episodes of depression lasting at least 2 weeks along with milder mania, called hypomania. Cyclothymia. This mild form of bipolar disorder still includes periods of depression and hypomania, but with no clear timeline for each episode. Also called cyclothymic disorder, you may be diagnosed if you’ve experienced cycling hypomania and depression for 2 years or more. Symptoms of affective disorders The symptoms of affective disorders can vary greatly. There are some common signs, however, for each of the main types. Depression prolonged sadness irritability or anxiety lethargy and lack of energy lack of interest in normal activities major changes in eating and sleeping habits difficulty concentrating feelings of guilt aches and pains that have no physical explanation suicidal thoughts unusual and chronic mood changes Bipolar disorder During a depressive episode, the symptoms may be similar to those for major depressive disorder. During mania, you might experience: needing less sleep exaggerated self-confidence irritability aggression self-importance impulsiveness recklessness delusions or hallucinations Causes of affective disorders The causes of affective disorders aren’t fully understood. Neurotransmitters, or brain chemicals, play a major role in affecting mood. When they’re imbalanced in some way, or don’t signal properly to your brain, an affective disorder can be the result. What exactly causes the imbalance isn’t fully known. Life events can trigger affective disorders. A traumatic event or personal loss can cause depression or another affective disorder. Use of alcohol and drugs is also a risk factor. There also seems to be a genetic factor. If someone in your family has one of these disorders, you’re at a greater risk of developing one as well. This means that they’re hereditary. However, this doesn’t guarantee you’ll develop an affective disorder just because a family member has one. Diagnosis of affective disorders There are no medical tests to diagnose affective disorders. To make a diagnosis, a mental health professional can give you a psychiatric evaluation. They will follow set guidelines. You should expect to be asked about your symptoms. Some tests may be done to look for underlying medical conditions. Treatments for affective disorders There are two main treatments for affective disorders: medication and therapy. Treatment usually involves a combination of both. There are many antidepressant medications available. You may need to try several before you find one that helps relieve your symptoms without too many side effects. Psychotherapy in addition to medication is also an important part of treatment. It can help you learn to cope with your disorder and possibly change behaviors that contribute to it. In addition to therapy and medications, supplemental approaches may be used to help treat some types of depression. These include vitamin D supplements and light therapy, which is supplied by specialized lamps. Talk to your doctor before taking any over-the-counter supplements for your condition. Your doctor may also recommend certain lifestyle changes, including regular exercise, a consistent sleep schedule, and a healthy diet. These can help complement your medical treatments, but shouldn’t replace them. Online therapy options Read our review of the best online therapy options to find the right fit for you Was this helpful? Outlook for affective disorders With appropriate and long-term treatment, the recovery outlook for an affective disorder is good. It’s important to understand that in most cases, these are chronic conditions. Most often they have to be treated long-term. While some cases are severe, most people with affective disorders who are being treated can live a normal life. Last medically reviewed on April 2, 2020 How we reviewed this article: SOURCES HISTORY Our experts continually monitor the health and wellness space, and we update our articles when new information becomes available. Current Version Apr 2, 2020 Written By Mary Ellen Ellis Medically Reviewed By Jennifer Litner, PhD, LMFT, CST Copy Edited By Jamie Elmer Share this article Medically reviewed by Jennifer Litner, PhD, LMFT, CST — By Mary Ellen Ellis — Updated on April 2, 2020 Cyclothymia Symptoms Diagnosis Treatments Outlook Cyclothymia, or cyclothymic disorder, is a mild mood disorder with symptoms similar to bipolar II disorder. But the two differ in intensity. Treatment can help manage the symptoms. Both cyclothymia and bipolar disorder cause emotional ups and downs, from manic highs to depressive lows. Cyclothymia is characterized by fluctuating low-level depressive symptoms along with periods of mild mania (hypomania). Symptoms must be present for at least two years before a diagnosis of cyclothymia may be made (one year in children). These changes in mood tend to occur in cycles, reaching highs and lows. In between these highs and lows, you may feel like your mood is stable. The main difference between the two disorders is intensity. The mood swings associated with cyclothymia are not as extreme as those that come with bipolar disorder: Those with bipolar disorder experience intense symptoms that meet clinically criteria for the diagnoses of mania and major depression, while those with cyclothymia experience milder “ups and down,” described as hypomania and mild depression. If left untreated, cyclothymia can increase your risk of developing bipolar disorder. The condition usually develops in adolescence. People with the disorder often appear to function normally, although they may seem “moody” or “difficult” to others. People will often not seek treatment because the mood swings do not seem severe. People with cyclothymia may occasionally even be hyper-productive. According to the most recent Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-V), cyclothymia is distinguished from bipolar disorder because it lacks the full criteria of major depression, mania, or a mixed episode disorder. However, some people with cyclothymia will develop bipolar I or bipolar II disorder later in life. What Are the Symptoms of Cyclothymia? People with cyclothymia usually experience many weeks of low-level depression followed by an episode of mild mania that lasts several days. Depressive symptoms of cyclothymia may include: irritability aggressiveness insomnia or hypersomnia (sleeping too much) changes in appetite weight loss or gain fatigue or low energy low sexual desire and function feelings of hopelessness, worthlessness, or guilt inattentiveness, lack of concentration, or forgetfulness unexplained physical symptoms The manic symptoms of cyclothymia may include: extremely high self-esteem excessive talking or speaking very quickly, sometimes so fast others have trouble following what the person is saying racing thoughts (muddled and disorganized) lack of focus restlessness and hyperactivity increased anxiety going for days with little or no sleep (without feeling tired) argumentative hypersexuality reckless or impulsive behavior Some patients experience “mixed periods,” in which a combination of both manic and depressed symptoms occur within a very short time — one followed immediately by the other. How Is Cyclothymia Diagnosed? Researchers are not sure what causes or triggers symptoms of cyclothymia. The condition is, however, known to run in families. A person does not have cyclothymia if they feel symptom-free for more than two months. To distinguish cyclothymia from regular moodiness, your doctor will compare your symptoms to the following clinical criteria: many periods of elevated mood (hypomania) and depression for at least two years (one year in children and teens) occurring at least half of the time periods of stable moods lasting less than two months symptoms that socially impact your daily life — at school, work, etc. symptoms that don’t meet the criteria for bipolar disorder, major depression or another mental disorder symptoms not caused by substance abuse or another medical condition Your doctor will discuss your symptoms and medical history with you. He/she may also ask you questions about your use of drugs or alcohol. Lab tests may also be performed to rule out other medical conditions that may be causing the symptoms. What Are the Treatments for Cyclothymia? Cyclothymia is a chronic condition that will require lifelong treatment. If you stop taking medications — even during periods of remission — your symptoms will return. Because cyclothymia may develop into bipolar disorder, it is crucial that you receive appropriate treatments. Alcohol and drug use may increase your symptoms as well. The main types of medications used to treat cyclothymia include: mood stabilizers such as lithium anti-seizure medications (also known as anticonvulsants) include divalproex sodium (Depakote), lamotrigine (Lamictal), and valproic acid (Depakene) atypical antipsychotic medications such as olanzapine (Zyprexa), quetiapine (Seroquel) and risperidone (Risperdal) may help patients who don’t respond to anti-seizure medications anti-anxiety medications such as benzodiazepine antidepressants should only be used in conjunction with a mood stabilizer as they may cause potentially harmful manic episodes when taken on their own Psychotherapy is considered a vital part of the treatment of cyclothymia. The two primary types of psychotherapy used to treat cyclothymia are cognitive behavior therapy and well-being therapy. Cognitive behavioral therapy focuses on identifying negative or unhealthy beliefs and behaviors and replacing them with positive or healthy ones. It may also help you manage stress and develop coping techniques. Well-being therapy focuses on improving overall quality of life rather than fixing specific psychological symptoms. One recent clinical study found that a combination of cognitive behavioral therapy and well-being therapy bring significant improvements to the lives of patients with cyclothymia. Other types of therapy that may benefit patients include talk, family, or group therapy. Online therapy options Read our review of the best online therapy options to find the right fit for you. Was this helpful? What Is the Outlook for Cyclothymia? There is no cure for cyclothymia, but there are treatments that will help you manage your symptoms. Your doctor will help you create a treatment plan that will most likely include a combination of medication and therapy. It can be tempting to stop taking your medication or attending therapy sessions during episodes of hypomania. But it’s very important that you stick with your treatment plan. Last medically reviewed on February 11, 2016