Global Regions Select language English .cls-1World Health Organization Home Health Topics Countries Newsroom Emergencies Data About WHO THE GLOBAL HEALTH OBSERVATORY Explore a world of health data IndicatorsCountries GHO Home Indicators Countries Data API Map Gallery Publications Data Search GHO Home Indicators Countries Data API Map Gallery Publications Data Search Data / GHO / Major Themes Health and Well-Being Stand-alone policy or plan for mental health Stand-alone mental health legislation Government expenditures on mental health as a percentage of total government expenditures on health (%) Government expenditures on mental hospitals as a percentage of total government expenditures on mental health (%) WHO / Vismita Gupta-Smith Mental health is more than the absence of mental disorders. Mental health is an integral part of health; indeed, there is no health without mental health. Mental health is determined by a range of socioeconomic, biological and environmental factors. Cost-effective public health and intersectoral strategies and interventions exist to promote, protect and restore mental health. Mental health is an integral and essential component of health. The WHO constitution states: "Health is a state of complete physical, mental and social well-being and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity." An important implication of this definition is that mental health is more than just the absence of mental disorders or disabilities. Mental health is a state of well-being in which an individual realizes his or her own abilities, can cope with the normal stresses of life, can work productively and is able to make a contribution to his or her community. Mental health is fundamental to our collective and individual ability as humans to think, emote, interact with each other, earn a living and enjoy life. On this basis, the promotion, protection and restoration of mental health can be regarded as a vital concern of individuals, communities and societies throughout the world. Mental health fact sheet Maternal mortality ratio (per 100 000 live births) Skilled health professionals density (per 10 000 population) Related topics Mental health governance Mental health service availability Suicide rates Highlights Suicide 800 000 persons approximately die from suicide globally each year (one death every 40 seconds) WHO Global, 2015 Financing < 2% of the global median of health budget is allocated to mental health in 2017 Mental Health ATLAS 2017 Human resources 9 is the median number of health workers per 100 000 population Rate of psychiatrists and nurses Health and Well-Being If you have any feedback, you are welcome to write it here. If you need to access the old Global Health Observatory data, you can do it here. But before you leave, please provide us your feedback about our new data portal. Regions Africa Americas Eastern Mediterranean Europe South-East Asia Western Pacific Policies Cyber security Ethics Permissions and licensing Preventing sexual exploitation Terms of use About us Careers Library Procurement Publications Frequently asked questions Contact us Report misconduct Privacy policy © 2024 WHO