Conditions Drugs & Supplements Well-Being Symptom Checker Find a Doctor More Subscribe Log In First Aid & Emergencies/Slideshows Slideshow: Caring for Wounds Medically Reviewed by Poonam Sachdev, MD on June 27, 2022 A Bit of Blood Is Good 1/10 Blood helps clean wounds, so a little bleeding is good. Most small cuts and scrapes stop bleeding pretty quickly, but you can help by applying firm, gentle pressure with gauze or a tissue. If blood soaks through, put another piece of gauze or tissue on top, don't remove the old one or you may separate the wound and start the bleeding again. Clean Cuts and Scrapes Gently 2/10 Ouch! Got another cut or scrape? Your first step is easy: Soothe and clean the wound with cool water. Then remove any pebbles or splinters with alcohol-sterilized tweezers. Gently wash around the wound with soap and a washcloth. Do not use irritating soap, iodine, alcohol, or hydrogen peroxide -- fresh, clean water should be all you need. Do You Need an Antibiotic Cream? 3/10 Antibiotic creams and ointments not only keep wounds moist but they can reduce the risks of infection. If you do use an antibiotic, apply a thin layer on the wound. Certain antibiotic ingredients can trigger a rash in some people. If you get a rash, stop using that ointment. To Bandage or Not to Bandage? 4/10 If your scrape will be rubbed by clothes, cover it with a bandage. An uncovered scab or scrape is at risk of reopening or infection. When in doubt, cover it up with an adhesive bandage to keep out the bacteria, then change the bandage daily. Signs of Adhesive or Latex Allergy 5/10 If you feel like it's itchy, blistery, or burning under your bandage, you may have an allergy to the adhesive used in some bandages. For sensitive skin, try switching to sterile gauze and paper tape, or an adhesive-free dressing. Signs of Healing 6/10 Almost as soon as you get a cut or scrape, your body begins healing the injury. White blood cells attack infection-causing bacteria. Platelets, red blood cells, and fibrin create a jelly-like clot over the wound and soon a protective scab forms. If your wound gets itchy, be gentle -- you want that scab to stay where it is. Quick Care for Minor Burns 7/10 Most of us have had a small burn or two. To treat one, cool the area right away with a cold cloth or cool running water to keep the skin from holding the heat and continuing to burn. Afterward, wash the burn with soap and water and dress it lightly. Leave any blisters that form alone -- they help to protect the skin as it heals. Caring for Surgical Wounds 8/10 Taking care of a surgical wound is similar to taking care of cuts and scrapes. You'll probably have to protect the incision with a bandage for a few days, and change the dressing daily. Follow your doctor's instructions for taking care of stitches or staples. You'll also want to keep the area dry, and report any increase in bleeding or redness to your doctor. Recognizing Signs of Infection 9/10 If there's skin redness that spreads out from your injury, swelling, green or yellow fluid, or increased warmth or tenderness around the wound, you may have an infection. Other signs include swollen lymph nodes at your neck, armpit, or groin, as well as body aches, chills, or fever. If you have any of these signs, give your doctor a call. See a Doctor About a Wound That ... 10/10 won't stop bleeding after 5-10 minutes of pressure is deeper or longer than a half-inch is near the eye is gaping or ragged was caused by something dirty or rusty has dirt or gravel stuck in it is very painful shows signs of infection or was caused by an animal or human bite Also see a doctor if you aren't sure if you're up to date on your tetanus vaccine. Sources Update History Share Scroll Down for the Next Article Sign up for our free WebMD Daily Newsletter Get doctor-approved health tips, news, and more. Subscribe By clicking Subscribe, I agree to the WebMD Terms & Conditions & Privacy Policy and understand that I may opt out of WebMD subscriptions at any time. How Does My Wound Heal, and How Do I Treat It? Medically Reviewed by Poonam Sachdev, MD on August 28, 2023 Written by Stephanie Watson Which Wounds Can You Treat at Home? 1/13 You can take care of most minor cuts and scrapes yourself. How can you tell you don't need medical help? Home treatment is OK if the wound isn't very deep and it's not in a spot where scarring is a problem, like your face. You can also treat it on your own if you can stop the bleeding in 10 minutes with gentle pressure. And make sure there isn't any dirt in the wound and you've had a tetanus shot in the last 10 years. Stage 1: The Bleeding Stops 2/13 In the first of four healing stages, your body swings into action to stop the flow of blood. Your blood vessel walls narrow to let less of the red stuff through. In minutes, blood cells called platelets rush to the site. Proteins in your blood act like glue to make the platelets clump together and stick to the opening in the blood vessel. This forms a clot, which plugs the bleeding. Stage 2: Inflammation Begins 3/13 Your blood platelets release special chemicals that cause inflammation. You might see some swelling and redness around the wound. White blood cells head to the scene. They clear the injured area of bacteria and other germs to keep it from getting infected. Your white blood cells also make chemicals called growth factors that help repair the injured area. Stage 3: Your Skin Rebuilds 4/13 Now your body's healing process kicks into gear. Blood cells arrive to start building new skin. They give your wound the oxygen and nutrients it needs to heal and grow new blood vessels. Chemical messengers direct cells to make collagen, a protein that acts like scaffolding to rebuild the damaged area. You might see a scar, which starts out red but should fade with time. Stage 4: The Home Stretch 5/13 All the things you need to rebuild your skin are now in place. The last stage of healing is about making the new skin stronger. You might see some stretching or puckering around the wound as the replacement tissue takes hold. Total healing can take days, months, or even years. Once the damage has been fully repaired, your skin should be about as strong as it was before the injury. Wound Care Step 1: Apply Pressure 6/13 Before you do anything, wash your hands with soap and water. Then the first step is to stop the bleeding. Put gentle pressure on your skin with a gauze pad or clean cloth. If blood soaks through the gauze, add another piece on top. Raise the injured area if you can to slow the flow of blood. Keep up the pressure for a few minutes. Wound Care Step 2: Rinse Well 7/13 Next, clean out any dirt and debris in your wound to prevent infection. Rinse the cut under running water, or pour a cup of clear water over it. You can also use an alcohol-free wipe or sterile gauze pad moistened with water. Don't use an antiseptic to wash the injury, because it could irritate your skin. Wound Care Step 3: Wash Around It 8/13 Put a little bit of soap on a washcloth and wash around the injured spot. Try not to get soap on the wound. Don't use hydrogen peroxide or iodine, because it could irritate skin that's already damaged. Afterward, gently pat the area dry with a clean towel or tissues. Don't use a cotton ball, because pieces of it could get stuck in the wound. Wound Care Step 4: Remove Debris 9/13 If you still see dirt in the cut after you've washed it, use tweezers cleaned with rubbing alcohol to gently pick it out. You can also use tweezers to remove any glass, gravel, or other things left inside the wound. If you can't get everything out, see your doctor. Wound Care Step 5: Use Ointment 10/13 Gently rub a thin layer of antibiotic ointment like Neosporin or Polysporin over the cut. It won't help you heal faster, but it will keep an infection away. It also lets your skin stay moist. Some people are sensitive to ointments. If you notice a rash around the cut, stop using it. Wound Care Step 6: Bandage 11/13 You don't have to cover small cuts and scrapes. But if your wound is in a spot that rubs against your clothes or may get dirty -- like on your knee or hand -- put on a gauze pad or a sterile bandage. A bandage keeps the area moist, which helps prevent scabs and scars. The dressing will also keep bacteria out and prevent infection. For deeper cuts, use a "butterfly" bandage to hold the skin closed. Wound Care Step 7: Change Bandages 12/13 Put on a new one at least once a day to keep the wound clean. And replace it if the old bandage gets wet or dirty. Wash your hands before you change the dressing. Try not to touch the wound. You can apply another layer of antibiotic ointment before you put on the new bandage. Watch Out for Infection 13/13 Any opening in the skin can get infected. As your wound heals, look out for these signs, and check with your doctor if you have: Redness and swelling A lot of pain near the wound Thick, grayish fluid draining from it A fever higher than 100.4 F Red streaks near the cut Sources Update History Share FEATURED Top doctors in Girona, CT Find more top doctors on Search RELATED LINKS First Aid News First Aid Reference First Aid Slideshows First Aid Videos First Aid Find a Doctor Find a Hospital First Aid A-Z How to Do CPR Common First Aid Conditions Symptom Checker More Related Topics Sign up for our free WebMD Daily Newsletter Get doctor-approved health tips, news, and more. Subscribe By clicking Subscribe, I agree to the WebMD Terms & Conditions & Privacy Policy and understand that I may opt out of WebMD subscriptions at any time. Follow WebMD on Social Media Download WebMD App Policies About Our Apps For Advertisers Privacy Policy Cookie Policy Editorial Policy Advertising Policy Correction Policy Manage Preferences Terms of Use © 2005 - 2024 WebMD LLC, an Internet Brands company. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.