Care at Mayo Clinic Health Library For Medical Professionals Research & Education at Mayo Clinic Giving to Mayo Clinic Request appointment Log in Search Appointments at Mayo Clinic Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations. Request Appointment First aid Cuts and scrapes: First aid Print Products and services By Mayo Clinic Staff These guidelines can help you care for minor cuts and scrapes: Wash your hands. This helps avoid infection. Stop the bleeding. Minor cuts and scrapes usually stop bleeding on their own. If needed, gently press the wound with a clean bandage or cloth. Raise the area until the bleeding stops. Clean the wound. Rinse the wound with water. Keeping the wound under running water will lower the risk of infection. Wash around the wound with soap. But don't get soap in the wound. And don't use hydrogen peroxide or iodine. Both can irritate wounds. Remove any dirt or debris with tweezers cleaned with alcohol. See a healthcare professional if you can't remove all debris. Put on an antibiotic or petroleum jelly. Put on a thin layer of an antibiotic ointment or petroleum jelly to keep the surface moist and help prevent scarring. Ingredients in some antibiotic ointments can cause a mild rash in some people. If you get a rash, stop using the ointment. Cover the wound. Put on a bandage, rolled gauze or gauze held in place with paper tape. Covering the wound keeps it clean. If you have just a minor scrape or scratch, don't cover it. Change the covering. Do this at least once a day or whenever the covering becomes wet or dirty. Get a tetanus shot. Get a tetanus shot if you haven't had one in the past five years and the wound is deep or dirty. Watch for signs of infection. See a healthcare professional if you see signs of infection on the skin or near the wound. These include expanding changes in color, increasing pain, drainage, warmth or swelling. From Mayo Clinic to your inbox Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview. Learn more about Mayo Clinic’s use of data. Subscribe! ShareTweet Nov. 22, 2023 Show references Products and Services A Book: Mayo Clinic Book of Home Remedies Advertisement Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission. Advertising & Sponsorship Policy Opportunities Ad Choices Mayo Clinic Press Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press. Mayo Clinic on Incontinence The Essential Diabetes Book Mayo Clinic on Hearing and Balance FREE Mayo Clinic Diet Assessment Mayo Clinic Health Letter - FREE book ART-20056711 First aid Cuts and scrapes: First aid Basics Let’s celebrate our doctors! Join us in celebrating and honoring Mayo Clinic physicians on March 30th for National Doctor’s Day. Give Now Find a doctor Explore careers Sign up for free e-newsletters About Mayo Clinic About this Site Contact Us Locations Health Information Policy Media Requests News Network Price Transparency Medical Professionals AskMayoExpert Clinical Trials Mayo Clinic Alumni Association Refer a Patient Businesses Executive Health Program International Business Collaborations Facilities & Real Estate Supplier Information Students Admissions Requirements Degree Programs Student & Faculty Portal Researchers Research Faculty Laboratories International Patients Appointments Financial Services International Locations & Offices Charitable Care & Financial Assistance Community Health Needs Assessment Financial Assistance Documents – Arizona Financial Assistance Documents – Florida Financial Assistance Documents – Minnesota Follow Mayo Clinic Get the Mayo Clinic app Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy Notice of Privacy Practices Notice of Nondiscrimination Accessibility Statement Advertising & Sponsorship Policy Site Map © 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved. Language: English Feedback