An official website of the European UnionHow do you know? EUROPEAN VACCINATION INFORMATION PORTAL An initiative of the European Union Search English (En) About vaccines Disease factsheets Resources Information from EU/EEA health authorities About us Home About vaccines How vaccines work How vaccines work Vaccines work by teaching the immune system how to fight off a disease in case it ever comes into contact with it. This greatly reduces the risk of becoming seriously ill or spreading a disease to others. Vaccines can protect against one or multiple diseases. Sometimes, multiple vaccines may be given at once to protect against several diseases. Vaccines can protect against either one or multiple diseases. Sometimes, multiple vaccines may be given at once to protect against several diseases. Most vaccines contain a weakened or an inactivated form of a virus or bacterium, or a small part of it, called an antigen. When a person gets vaccinated, their immune system recognises the antigen as foreign. This activates immune cells to produce antibodies and create a memory of the virus or bacterium. Later, if the person comes into contact with the actual virus or bacterium, their immune system will remember it, and then produce the right antibodies and activate the right immune cells quickly, to kill the virus or bacterium. This protects the person from the disease. In contrast, people who become immune by getting the actual disease can spread it to others and put themselves at risk of serious complications from the disease. 1. The vaccine contains an antigen. 2. When vaccinated, the person's immune system reacts to the antigen and learns to fight it. 3. When infected with the actual disease, the person is protected as the immune system remembers how to react. Protection Different vaccines bring about different levels of protection. The duration of protection varies depending on the disease. Some vaccines can only protect against a disease for a short period and may need booster doses; for others, immunity can last a lifetime. Vaccination not only protects people who have received a vaccine. It also indirectly protects unvaccinated people in the community, by decreasing the risk of exposure to infection. This is known as community immunity (also called herd immunity). Components In addition to one or more antigens, other components can also be added to help keep the vaccine stable and effective. Regulators make sure that all these components are safe. These components include: stabilisers: to keep vaccine components stable; adjuvants: these improve the immune response to the vaccine by making the response stronger, faster and more sustained over time – an example of which is aluminium; excipients: these are inactive ingredients, like water, or sodium chloride (salt), as well as preservatives or stabilisers that help the vaccine remain unchanged during storage, keeping it active. In some vaccines, there may also be trace amounts of other substances used in the manufacturing process, such as ovalbumin (a protein found in eggs) or neomycin (an antibiotic). If these substances might cause a reaction in sensitive or allergic individuals, their presence is declared in the information given to healthcare workers and patients. Types of vaccines Protein-based vaccines mRNA and viral-vector vaccines Vaccines based on proteins contain small pieces of a virus or bacteria that are not dangerous but help the immune system recognise and fight a real infection. The flu, tetanus and whooping cough vaccines are examples of this type of vaccine and have been in use for many years. These proteins, made in a laboratory, only stimulate the immune system and do not cause an infection or disease. Protein-based vaccines often contain substances called adjuvants. These strengthen the immune system’s response to the vaccine and increase protection. Approval of vaccines in the EU Find out how authorities in Europe test to make sure vaccines are safe and effective before they are approved for use. Benefits of vaccination How do vaccines protect us and stop the spread of disease? Find out their benefits for individuals and the community. COVID-19 medicines European Medicines Agency - Safety of COVID-19 vaccines About vaccines Benefits of vaccination How vaccines work Vaccine safety and side effects Approval of vaccines in the EU When to vaccinate Disease factsheets HPV Influenza Measles RSV More... Surveillance data in the EU European Commission European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control European Medicines Agency Follow us: Facebook Twitter Youtube Legal notice Copyright Personal data protection Language policy Accessibility Cookies Sitemap © European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) 2024 About vaccines Disease factsheets Resources Information from EU/EEA health authorities About us