Health Conditions Discover Plan Connect SUBSCRIBE Open Wound Types Treatment Complications Outlook Minor open wound can usually be managed at home by applying pressure and a bandage. But large wounds, or wounds that won’t stop bleeding, require medical care. What is an open wound? An open wound is an injury involving an external or internal break in body tissue, usually involving the skin. Nearly everyone will experience an open wound at some point in their life. Most open wounds are minor and can be treated at home. Falls, accidents with sharp objects, and car accidents are the most common causes of open wounds. In the case of a serious accident, you should seek immediate medical care. This is especially true if there’s a lot of bleeding or if bleeding lasts for more than 20 minutes. Are there different types of open wounds? There are four types of open wounds, which are classified depending on their cause. Abrasion An abrasion occurs when your skin rubs or scrapes against a rough or hard surface. Road rash is an example of an abrasion. There’s usually not a lot of bleeding, but the wound needs to be scrubbed and cleaned to avoid infection. Laceration A laceration is a deep cut or tearing of your skin. Accidents with knives, tools, and machinery are frequent causes of lacerations. In the case of deep lacerations, bleeding can be rapid and extensive. Puncture A puncture is a small hole caused by a long, pointy object, such as a nail or needle. Sometimes, a bullet can cause a puncture wound. Punctures may not bleed much, but these wounds can be deep enough to damage internal organs. If you have even a small puncture wound, visit your doctor to get a tetanus shot and prevent infection. Avulsion An avulsion is a partial or complete tearing away of skin and the tissue beneath. Avulsions usually occur during violent accidents, such as body-crushing accidents, explosions, and gunshots. They bleed heavily and rapidly. How are open wounds treated? Some wounds may be treated at home and others may require a trip to your doctor for a medical approach. Home care for minor wounds Minor wounds can be treated at home. First, wash and disinfect the wound to remove all dirt and debris. Use direct pressure and elevation to control bleeding and swelling. When wrapping the wound, always use a sterile dressing or bandage. Very minor wounds may heal without a bandage. You’ll need to keep the wound clean and dry for five days. You should also make sure you get plenty of rest. Pain typically accompanies a wound. You can take acetaminophen (Tylenol) as directed on the package. Avoid products with aspirin since they can cause or prolong bleeding. Apply ice if you have bruising or swelling, and avoid picking at scabs. If you’re spending time outdoors, use a sunscreen that’s sun protection factor (SPF) 30 on the area until it’s completely healed. When to see a doctor Although you can treat some wounds at home, you should see a doctor if: an open wound is deeper than 1/2 inch bleeding doesn’t stop with direct pressure bleeding lasts longer than 20 minutes bleeding is the result of a serious accident Medical treatments Your doctor may use different techniques to treat your open wound. After cleaning and possibly numbing the area, your doctor may close the wound using skin glue, sutures, or stitches. You may receive a tetanus shot if you have a puncture wound. Depending on the location of your wound and the potential for infection, your doctor may not close the wound and let it heal naturally. This is known as healing by secondary intention, meaning from the base of the wound to the superficial epidermis. This process may require you to pack your wound with gauze. Although the healing may not look pretty, it prevents infection and the formation of abscesses. Another treatment for an open wound includes pain medication. Your doctor may also prescribe penicillin or another antibiotic if there’s an infection or high risk for developing an infection. In some cases, you may need surgery. If a body part is severed, it should be brought to the hospital for possible reattachment. Wrap the body part in moist gauze and pack it in ice. When you leave the doctor’s office, you might have bandages and dressings. It’s important to wash your hands and work on a clean surface when changing bandages and dressings. Disinfect and dry the wound thoroughly before dressing it again. Dispose of old dressings and bandages in plastic bags. Are there any complications from having an open wound? The main complication of an open wound is the risk for infection. Call your doctor immediately if you’ve had a puncture, deep laceration, or serious accident and you’re showing signs of significant bleeding or infection. Signs of hemorrhage include continuous bleeding that doesn’t respond to direct pressure. You may have an infection if the wound shows: an increase in drainage thick green, yellow, or brown pus pus with a foul odor Other signs of infection include: a fever of over 100.4°F (38°C) for more than four hours a tender lump in your groin or armpit a wound that isn’t healing Your doctor will drain or debride the wound and often prescribe an antibiotic if bacterial infection develops. In serious cases, you may need surgery to remove infected tissue and sometimes the surrounding tissue as well. Conditions that can develop from an open wound include: Lockjaw. This condition is caused by an infection from the bacteria that cause tetanus. It can cause muscle contractions in your jaw and neck. Necrotizing fasciitis. This is a severe soft tissue infection caused by a variety of bacteria including Clostridium and Streptococcus that can lead to tissue loss and sepsis. Cellulitis. This is an infection of your skin that’s not in immediate contact with the wound. Outlook Whether you have a minor or a more serious open wound, it’s important to take quick action. Some open wounds can be treated at home, but this isn’t always the case. You need medical attention if you have a deep cut or if you’re bleeding a lot. This ensures you receive the most appropriate treatment and reduces your risk for complications and infection. Last medically reviewed on August 14, 2018 How we reviewed this article: SOURCES HISTORY Our experts continually monitor the health and wellness space, and we update our articles when new information becomes available. Current Version Aug 23, 2023 Written By Julie Roddick Edited By Kelly Morrell Aug 14, 2018 Medically Reviewed By Andrew Gonzalez, MD, JD, MPH Share this article Medically reviewed by Andrew Gonzalez, M.D., J.D., MPH — By Julie Roddick — Updated on August 23, 2023 Cuts and Puncture Wounds A cut, or laceration, is a tear or opening in the skin that occurs due to an external injury. It can be superficial, affecting only the surface of your skin or deep enough to involve: tendons muscles ligaments bones A puncture wound is a deep wound that occurs due to something sharp and pointed, such as a nail. The opening on the skin is small, and the puncture wound may not bleed much. Puncture wounds can easily become infected. A doctor should always examine a deep puncture wound. Puncture wounds that occur due to a bite or stepping on a rusty piece of metal, such as a nail, need prompt medical attention. A cut can cause external and internal bleeding. A significant cut can cause profuse bleeding if it isn’t treated promptly and properly. Cuts and puncture wounds that cause excessive blood loss or those that damage the organs can be fatal. What are the causes? The most common causes of cuts and puncture wounds are external injuries that break or tear the skin. These causes include: falls car accidents broken glass stabbings razor cuts The most common causes for puncture wounds include: stepping on a sharp object, such as a nail getting bitten falling onto something sharp Although puncture wounds don’t normally bleed heavily, they’re prone to infection. This is especially true if a bite or a rusty object caused the wound. See your doctor immediately if this is the case. First aid for cuts and puncture wounds Cuts or puncture wounds that are minor may be treated at home. For more severe cuts or puncture wounds, immediate medical attention is necessary. Cuts First, stop any bleeding by covering the cut and applying gentle pressure. If the cut is bleeding heavily and you aren’t able to stop it, seek medical treatment immediately. Next, clean the cut thoroughly with an alcohol wipe, antiseptic wash, or clean water. Dip a cotton swab into hydrogen peroxide and lightly roll it over the area of the cut to clean it. Use tweezers that have been cleaned with alcohol to remove debris on the surface of the cut. If you see debris embedded in the cut, don’t attempt to remove it. Seek help from your doctor or go to the nearest emergency room. Once the cut has been cleaned, apply an antibiotic cream to it. This can prevent infection and speed the healing process. Apply a bandage to the cut site. Change the bandage daily and whenever it becomes wet or dirty. Deeper cuts may require medical treatment. Treatment options for deep cuts include stitches, staples, or liquid stitches. You may also need to take antibiotics to prevent infection. Puncture wounds First, attempt to stop the bleeding by covering the wound with a clean bandage and applying gentle pressure. If the wound is bleeding heavily and you cannot stop it, immediately seek emergency medical care. Next, clean the area thoroughly using a small alcohol wipe. Don’t attempt to wash a puncture wound. If you notice debris embedded into the puncture wound, don’t try to remove it. Don’t probe the wound if you realize part of the object that caused the wound has broken off. Instead, seek emergency medical attention immediately. Once the skin is clean, apply an over-the-counter antibiotic cream to prevent infection. Cover the puncture wound with a bandage. You should change the bandage daily or sooner if it becomes wet or dirty. Check for signs of infection, such as: redness drainage, such as pus, from the wound site warmth or swelling in the surrounding area When is a cut or puncture wound an emergency? Although most minor puncture wounds and cuts heal without treatment beyond first aid and home care, some should receive immediate medical attention. Seek emergency medical care if you notice any of the following: the bleeding is heavy, spurting, or doesn’t stop after 10 minutes of applying pressure feeling and function are impaired in the area of the cut or wound muscle, tendon, or bone is exposed Contact your doctor immediately if: debris is embedded in the cut or wound the cut or wound occurred due to a bite you haven’t had a tetanus shot in 10 years you stepped on an object, such as a nail the cut or wound occurred due to a fish hook the cut or wound shows the symptoms of infection, such as swelling around the site, throbbing pain, or fluid leaking from the cut or wound Your doctor may suggest you get a tetanus vaccine. Complications of cuts and puncture wounds Possible complications from a cut or puncture wound include: a wound infection a blood infection, or sepsis gangrene an amputation a loss of function in the area of the wound nerve damage organ damage Preventing cuts and puncture wounds Prevent cuts and puncture wounds by taking the following steps to ensure your physical safety: Don’t play sports without using proper protective gear. Wear shoes and make sure the soles are sturdy and cannot be punctured by a nail. Don’t use heavy machinery or tools without wearing proper safety equipment and shoes. After an accident, quickly clear away debris, such as broken glass. Dry up spills, especially on slippery surfaces, before running or walking over the surface. Last medically reviewed on October 31, 2019 How we reviewed this article: SOURCES Share this article Medically reviewed by William Morrison, M.D. — By April Kahn — Updated on November 1, 2019 READ THIS NEXT Surgical Wound Medically reviewed by Elaine K. Luo, M.D. READ MORE