Vaccines.gov Home Find COVID‑19 Vaccines Find Flu Vaccines Español Need help finding a COVID‑19 vaccine in the U.S.? Call 1-800-232-0233 (TTY 1-888-720-7489) Find a COVID‑19 vaccine near you Use Vaccines.gov to find a location near you, then call or visit their website to make an appointment. Find COVID‑19 Vaccines I'm looking for flu vaccines Powered by VaccineFinder Updated COVID-19 vaccines are now available for children and adults Availability will continue to increase, so if you don't find vaccines near you, contact your local pharmacy or health care provider, or check back later. Once you find a location that works for you, please confirm vaccine availability through their site. If you have insurance, check with your selected location or your insurer to confirm that COVID-19 vaccine is covered, and the location is in network. If you have health insurance but it doesn't fully cover COVID-19 vaccines, you can find locations that provide free vaccines for adults by narrowing your search to find locations that are part of the Bridge Access Program. Check with your location or insurer to confirm that the location is in network. If you don't have health insurance, you can find locations that provide free vaccines for adults by narrowing your search to find locations that are part of the Bridge Access Program. Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) Infants and older adults are more likely to develop severe RSV and need hospitalization. Vaccines are available to protect older adults from severe RSV. Monoclonal antibody products are available to protect infants and young children from severe RSV. Talk to your health care provider for information about RSV vaccination and monoclonal antibody products. Learn more about RSV and RSV prevention. Search for Flu Vaccine Locations The first and most important step to protect yourself against flu viruses is to get a flu vaccine. You can get a flu vaccine at the same time as a COVID-19 vaccine. Find your flu vaccine. Frequently Asked Questions How do I schedule an appointment for a vaccine? Are COVID-19 vaccines safe? Can I get a COVID-19 vaccine in my home? What do I need to know about the federal mask distribution program? Visit the CDC’s Frequently Asked Questions page for information about COVID‑19 vaccinations. Get Help COVID‑19 Vaccine Hotline Help is available in English, Spanish, and many other languages. 1-800-232-0233 TTY 1-888-720-7489 Disability Information and Access Line (DIAL) COVID‑19 vaccination support for people with disabilities. 1-888-677-1199 DIAL@n4a.org We want to make COVID‑19 vaccination easy and accessible to everyone. We work with partners such as clinics, pharmacies and health departments to provide accurate and up-to-date information about vaccination services in your area. This page is brought to you by the United States Department of Health and Human Services, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), and VaccineFinder from Boston Children’s Hospital. We can do this. Support Contact Us COVID‑19 Vaccine FAQ Resources COVID‑19 Vaccine Provider Data Flu Vaccine Provider Data Provider Resources Legal Privacy CDC Website Exit Disclaimer Nondiscrimination Vulnerability Disclosure Policy Accessibility Conformance