University Health Services Skip to content Skip to search Emergency 911 Medical Services 609-258-3141 Main Menu Using Our Services Using Our ServicesSubmenu Medical Services Medical ServicesSubmenu Counseling & Psychological Services Counseling & Psychological ServicesSubmenu Health Promotion & Prevention Services Health Promotion & Prevention ServicesSubmenu Occupational Health Services Occupational Health ServicesSubmenu SHARE About Us News & Events Student Insurance Health Resources , (current section) Support UHS Make an Appointment Make an AppointmentSubMenu Search Home Health Resources Section Menu Alcohol Cannabis Coronavirus (COVID-19) Drug Use Ergonomics & Computer Use Mpox OTC Supplies Sexual Health Stress Travel Health & Safety Upper Respiratory Tract Infections Common Illnesses Allergies Colds and Flu Conjunctivitis ("pink eye“) Diarrhea Headaches Mononucleosis Stomach Aches Allergies Allergies are an immune response triggered by allergens, an ordinarily harmful substance. Causes People with allergies have especially sensitive immune systems that react when they contact allergens. Common allergens include: foods (nuts, eggs, milk, soy, shellfish, wheat) pollen mold latex pet dander Symptoms Because there are so many possible causes, the symptoms of allergies vary widely. Airborne allergens, like pollen and pet dander, are likely to cause: Eye irritation Runny nose Stuffy nose Puffy, watery eyes Sneezing Inflamed, itchy nose and throat Allergens that are consumed, like foods or certain medications, can cause: Hives or skin rashes Gastrointestinal distress (diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, excessing gas, indigestion) Tingling or swelling of the lips, face, or tongue Itchiness Difficulty breathing or wheezing Fainting/ or lightheadedness In cases of a more extreme response, called anaphylaxis, symptoms are severe and life-threatening. Treatment The easiest and most effective way to treat allergies is to get rid of or avoid the cause. Where unavoidable, some lifestyle changes can reduce your allergy symptoms. For example, if you are allergic to dust mites, make an effort to keep your room clean and free of dust by frequent vacuuming, dusting, and washing of bedding. For pollen allergies, avoid being outside when pollen counts are high and keep the windows to your room shut. Because it is very difficult to avoid certain allergens, medication may be necessary to lessen symptoms caused by allergens, other than food and drugs. Antihistamines: help relieve or prevent the sneezing, itchy eyes and throat, and postnasal drip that the allergen may cause. They are sold in many forms (i.e., pills, nasal sprays, liquids, etc.). Decongestants: help reduce congestion in your nasal membranes by narrowing the blood vessels that supply those membranes. They can be purchased in several forms (liquid, pill or nasal spray) and may be used with an antihistamine or alone to treat nasal swelling related to allergies. Limit use of nasal sprays to fewer than two to three days in a row because prolonged use can cause the nasal membrane swells, resulting in severe nasal obstruction. Anti-inflammatory agents (e.g., corticosteroid): help reduce swelling of the airways, nasal congestion and sneezing. Typically taken as a nasal spray. Some people report that corticosteroids irritate nasal passages. Allergy shots: recommended for serious allergy sufferers, this series of shots are administered by a healthcare provider and contain small amounts of the allergens that cause you discomfort. The goal of allergy shots is to enable your immune system to build better defenses against allergens. Some allergies go away with age, but others are lifelong. Prevention Avoid the outdoors between 5-10 a.m. and save outside activities for late afternoon or after a heavy rain, when pollen levels are lower. Keep windows in your living spaces closed to lower exposure to pollen. To keep cool, use air conditioners and avoid using window and attic fans. Wear a medical alert bracelet or other means to communicate to others about your allergy in case of a reaction. Discuss a prescription for epinephrine (e.g., EpiPen) with your healthcare provider, if you have risk of serious allergic reaction. Review product labels carefully before buying or consuming any item Know what you are eating or drinking. Cold and Flu Colds and influenza (flu) are the most common illnesses among college students. Causes Both of these illnesses are upper respiratory infections, meaning they involve your nose, throat, and lungs. Viruses cause both colds and flu by increasing inflammation of the membranes in the nose and throat. Most transmission of these viruses occurs via hand-to-hand contact. Symptoms Flu symptoms come on suddenly and affect the body all over. Flu symptoms are usually more serious than a cold and include: fever (100° F), headache, more intense pain and fatigue, and more severe, often dry cough. When you get the flu, you are also more prone to bronchitis, sinus, and ear infections. Cold symptoms mostly affect above the neck and include: a runny or stuffy nose (nasal congestion), sneezing, sore throat, and cough. You may also experience a mild headache, body aches or a low grade fever. Typically, a cold lasts 2-14 days. Treatment If any problem is causing you discomfort, you should seek medical care. Seek medical attention promptly if you have: a fever of 102° F or greater (which may indicate a more serious infection), a persisting cough, especially with a significant fever (which could indicate pneumonia), a persistent sore throat (especially if runny nose does not develop - which could indicate a strep infection), or any cold lasting more than 10 days. Because colds and flu are caused by viruses, they cannot be cured by antibiotics. There are tips to help you feel better and strengthen your immune system to fight illness: Rest more than usual and avoid exercise until symptoms are gone. Drink lots of clear fluids (e.g., water, tea). Stay away from cigarette smoke. Do not take antibiotics unless specifically prescribed for you to cure the illness from which you currently suffer. Avoid drinking alcohol because it weakens your immune system and may interact with medications. Avoid caffeine, which can increase congestion and dehydration. Eat a well-balanced diet, including fruits, vegetables, and grains. More Specific Remedies for Comfort RUNNY NOSE/CONGESTION: Decongestants (e.g. pseudoephedrine) can relieve a runny nose and congestion, but these medications can inhibit sleep and suppress appetite. Salt water nasal sprays (e.g. NaSal or Ocean) can ease nasal congestion and thin mucus. However, excessive use of medicated nose sprays, like Afrin, can cause dependence and may make congestion worse. Humidifiers and hot showers can help to moisten nasal passages and clear mucus. COUGH: Dextromethorphan is an effective cough suppressant, but because a cough is a protective reflex, it is not usually a bad thing. Take dextromethorphan if your cough is interfering with sleep or work. Water vapor from humidifiers and showers can help loosen the mucus causing a cough, as can chicken soup. SORE THROAT: Phenol in lozenges and sprays is an effective pain reliever for sore throats. Gargling with warm saltwater (1 tsp. salt in one cup of warm water) every four hours may help ease pain by reducing swollen tonsils. Drinking tea with lemon (with or without honey). FEVER/PAIN: Acetaminophen, Aspirin, Ibuprofen. If symptoms are severe, you may alternate acetaminophen and ibuprofen every two hours for pain or fever relief. Prevention UHS offers flu shots to Princeton students at a reduced cost every fall. Even though getting a flu shot will not completely eliminate your chances of developing the flu, it will certainly reduce the risk. Each year, a new vaccine made from inactivated (killed) influenza viruses is formulated. Since it may take the immune system time to respond to the vaccination, the inactivated vaccine should be given 6 to 8 weeks before flu season begins in order to prevent infection or reduce the severity of the illness. The flu is probably only contagious during the first three days of illness, and the incubation period is 24-72 hours, meaning you might not show symptoms for three days after contracting the virus. It is rare to catch a cold virus through the air – most transmission occurs via hand-to-hand contact. To prevent colds, flu, and other illnesses, follow these tips: Wash your hands often (which is good advice for keeping healthy in any situation). Keep them away from your nose, eyes, and mouth. Use an instant hand sanitizer when you can’t wash your hands. Get regular exercise and eat well. Follow good sleep habits. Get a flu shot each fall (offered to all students at a lower cost by UHS each fall) Conjunctivitis (“pink eye“) Causes Conjunctivitis, an inflammation of the transparent membrane (conjunctiva) that lines your eyelids and part of your eyeballs, has several possible causes. It could be a bacterial or viral infection, an allergic reaction to pollen or animal dander, or a result of chemical irritants (smoke, chlorine, lens solution, etc.). Symptoms These symptoms may last a few hours to several weeks: redness, itching, tearing, burning sensation, pus-like discharge and/or crusting of the eyelids. Because conjunctivitis causes inflammation of the small blood vessels in the conjunctiva to become more prominent, the whites of your eyes will appear pink or red. When you wake you are likely to feel that your eyelids are pasted shut, and your vision may not be as clear as usual. Treatment Because pink eye is highly contagious, early diagnosis is important. Bacterial cases can be cured with antibiotic eye drops, viral conjunctivitis clears up on its own, and allergic reactions can be treated with various types of eye drops. Here are some general tips: Wash your hands frequently to prevent spreading an existing infection to your other eye, and to other people. Don’t rub your eyes. Use a cool wet washcloth to soak off any crusting. Use a warm or cool compress to reduce discomfort. Discard eye make-up because it may cause future infection. Wash any clothing that may be contaminated, including towels and pillowcases. Try to use clean towels and pillowcases everyday. Avoid wearing contact lenses and discard current lenses. If eye drops are prescribed, place drop in pocket formed by pulling down lower lid. Make sure you don’t touch the bottle to the eye in order to prevent contamination. If the infection does not improve in 2 or 3 days, make an appointment for re-evaluation. Prevention Pink eye is extremely contagious, so if you know someone who is infected, make sure you do not expose yourself to contact with the person’s eye fluid. The infection can easily be passed via keyboards, doorknobs, make-up, pens, gym equipment, and a vast number of other items. To protect yourself, wash your hands frequently, avoid touching your eyes, and wash anything that may be contaminated. Diarrhea Causes Bacterial infection, caused by contaminated food or water Viral infection Parasites, which can enter the body through food or water Food intolerance, such as the inability to digest lactose, the sugar in milk Overuse of alcohol or laxatives Medication, such as some antibiotics or antacids containing magnesium Menstrual cramps Stress or a panic attack Symptoms watery, loose stools frequent bowel movements cramping or pain in the abdomen, nausea, bloating possibly fever or bloody stools, depending on the cause Treatment Usually diarrhea will clear up on its own in a day or two, but a prolonged case may cause complications. The most important concern is dehydration. If you have symptoms of dehydration, a fever above 102° F, bloody stools (black and tarry), severe abdomen or rectum pain, or diarrhea lasting more than 3 days you should consult a physician. Here’s some advice for taking care of diarrhea yourself: Avoid foods that are milk-based, greasy, high-fiber, or very sweet because these are likely to aggravate diarrhea. Avoid caffeine and alcohol. Do not eat solid food if you have signs of dehydration (thirst, light-headed, dark urine). Instead, drink about 2 cups of clear fluids per hour (if vomiting isn’t present), such as sports drinks and broth. Water alone is not enough because your body needs sodium and sugar to replace what it’s losing. Avoid high sugar drinks, like apple juice, grape juice, and soda, which can pull water into the intestine and make the diarrhea persist. Don’t drink clear liquids exclusively for more than 24 hours. Begin eating normal meals within 12 hours, but stick to food that is bland and won’t irritate your intestine. Some doctors suggest the “BRAT“ diet which includes foods that are low in fiber, fat, and sugar. BRAT stands for Bananas, Rice, Applesauce, and Toast. Use over-the-counter lactobacillus acidophilus capsules or tablets. These bacteria help maintain a healthy intestine, and