Health Conditions Discover Plan Connect SUBSCRIBE Everything You Want to Know About Rheumatoid Arthritis Symptoms Causes and risk factors Diagnosis Blood tests Treatment Medications Home remedies Diet Types Seropositive RA Hand RA What it feels like RA vs. OA Is it hereditary? Complications Takeaway Rheumatoid arthritis is an autoimmune condition that can cause pain, swelling, and stiffness in the joints. Though there is no cure, early diagnosis and treatment can help manage symptoms and prevent permanent joint damage. What’s rheumatoid arthritis? Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune disease that can cause joint pain, inflammation, and damage throughout your body. The joint damage that RA causes usually happens on both sides of the body. So, if a joint is affected in one of your arms or legs, the same joint in the other arm or leg will probably be affected, too. This is one way that doctors distinguish RA from other forms of arthritis, such as osteoarthritis (OA). Treatments work best when RA is diagnosed early, so it’s important to learn the signs. Read on to learn everything you want to know about RA, from types and symptoms to home remedies, diets, and other treatments. Rheumatoid arthritis symptoms RA is a chronic disease marked by symptoms of inflammation and pain in the joints. These symptoms and signs increase during periods known as flares or exacerbations. Other times are known as periods of remission — this is when symptoms can disappear completely. RA symptoms commonly affect joints in the hands, wrists, and knees, but can also affect tissues and organs throughout the body including the lungs, heart, and eyes. Symptoms can include: pain or aching in more than one joint stiffness in more than one joint tenderness and swelling in more than one joint the same joint symptoms on both sides of the body loss of joint function and deformities fatigue low-grade fever loss of appetite weakness Symptoms can vary from mild to severe. It’s important not to ignore your symptoms, even if they come and go. Knowing the early signs of RA will help you and your healthcare provider better treat and manage it. Causes and risk factors for rheumatoid arthritis There are a number of genetic and environmental factors that may increase your risk of developing rheumatoid arthritis. Causes RA is an autoimmune disorder and is the result of your body’s immune system attacking healthy body tissues. However, the specific causes or triggers of RA are not yet known. If you have RA, your immune system sends antibodies to the lining of your joints as part of the disease process. These antibodies attack the tissues lining your joints, causing the lining cells (synovial cells) to divide and contribute to inflammation. During this process, chemicals are released that can damage nearby bones, cartilage, tendons, and ligaments. If RA is not treated, the joint will become damaged and lose its shape and alignment, eventually becoming destroyed. Risk factors Age. The onset of RA is highest among adults in their 50s. Risk continues to increase with age for people assigned male at birth. RA often occurs in people assigned female at birth during their child-bearing years. Sex. People assigned female at birth are two to three times more likely to develop RA than people assigned male at birth. Genetics. People born with certain genes, called HLA class II genotypes, are more likely to develop RA. The risk of RA may be highest when people with these genes have obesity or are exposed to environmental factors like smoking. History of live births. People with ovaries who have never given birth may be at a greater risk of developing RA than those who have given birth. Early life exposure. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, children whose mothers smoked have double the risk of developing RA as adults. Smoking. Studies show that people who smoke cigarettes are at an increased risk of developing RA. Obesity. Having obesity can increase the risk of developing RA. Diet. High consumption of sodium, sugar (especially fructose), red meat, and iron is associated with an increased risk of developing RA. Rheumatoid arthritis diagnosis Diagnosing RA can take time and may require multiple lab tests to confirm clinical examination findings. Your healthcare provider will use several tools to diagnose RA. First, they’ll ask about your symptoms and medical history. They’ll also perform a physical exam of your joints. This will include: looking for swelling and redness examining joint function and range of motion touching the affected joints to check for warmth and tenderness examining for skin nodules testing your reflexes and muscle strength If they suspect RA, they’ll most likely refer you to a specialist called a rheumatologist. Since no single test can confirm a diagnosis of RA, your healthcare provider or rheumatologist may use several different types of tests. They may test your blood for certain substances like antibodies, or check the level of certain substances like acute phase reactants that are elevated during inflammatory conditions. These can be a sign of RA and help support the diagnosis. They may also request certain imaging tests, such as an ultrasound, X-ray, or MRI. Tests not only show if joint damage has occurred but also how severe the damage is. A complete evaluation and monitoring of other organ systems might be recommended for some people with RA, too. Learn more about the process of diagnosing RA. Blood tests for rheumatoid arthritis There are several types of blood tests that help your healthcare provider or rheumatologist determine whether you have RA. These tests include: Rheumatoid factor test. The RF blood test checks for a protein called rheumatoid factor. High levels of rheumatoid factor are associated with autoimmune diseases, especially RA. Anticitrullinated peptide antibody test (anti-CCP). This test looks for an antibody that’s associated with RA. People who have this antibody usually have the disease. However, not everyone with RA tests positive for this antibody. The anti-CCP test is more specific for RA than the RF blood test, and often is positive before the RF test. Antinuclear antibody test. The antinuclear antibody panel (ANA) tests your immune system to see if it’s producing antibodies to the nucleus of cells. Your body often makes ANA antibodies as a response to many different types of autoimmune conditions, including RA. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate. The ESR test helps determine the degree of inflammation in your body. The result tells your doctor whether inflammation is present. However, it doesn’t indicate the cause or site of the inflammation. C-reactive protein test. A severe infection or significant inflammation anywhere in your body can trigger your liver to make C-reactive protein. High levels of this inflammatory marker are associated with RA. Find out more about the different RA blood tests. Rheumatoid arthritis treatment There’s no cure for RA, but there are effective treatments that can help you manage it and prevent damage. Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) can require both patients and doctors to adjust as they figure out the best ways to treat the symptoms and slow the progression of the condition. Recently, advances in treatment strategies have resulted in ever-improving outcomes and quality of life for those with rheumatoid arthritis. Treat to Target is a treatment philosophy that rheumatologists use to effectively manage this disease. The treat-to-target approach has resulted in fewer symptoms and higher remission rates for those with RA. The treatment strategy involves: setting a specific testing goal that signals either remission or low disease state testing acute phase reactants and performing monthly monitoring to assess progress of treatment and management plan switching medication regimen promptly if progress isn’t made Treatments for RA help to manage the pain and control the inflammatory response. In many cases, this can result in remission. Decreasing the inflammation can also help to prevent further joint and organ damage. Treatments may include: medications alternative or home remedies dietary changes specific types of exercise Your healthcare provider will work with you to determine the best treatment plan for your medical needs. For many people, these treatments help them live an active life and reduce the risk of long-term complications. Learn more about specific RA treatments and how to treat flares. Rheumatoid arthritis medications There are many types of medication for RA. Some of these medications help to reduce the pain and inflammation of RA. Others help to reduce flares and limit the damage that RA does to your joints. The following over-the-counter medications help reduce the pain and inflammation during RA flares: nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) corticosteroids acetaminophen (reduces pain but not inflammation) The following drugs work to slow the damage that RA can cause to your body: Disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs). DMARDs work by blocking your body’s immune system response. This helps to slow down the progression of RA. Biologics. These new generation biologic DMARDs provide a targeted response to inflammation rather than blocking your body’s entire immune system response. They are an effective treatment for people who don’t respond well enough to more traditional DMARDs. Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitors. These are a newer subcategory of DMARDs that block certain immune responses. JAK inhibitors are drugs that your healthcare provider may use to help prevent inflammation and stop damage to your joints when DMARDs and biologic DMARDs don’t work for you. Home remedies for rheumatoid arthritis Certain home remedies and lifestyle adjustments may help to improve your quality of life when living with RA. This includes exercise, rest, and assistive devices. Exercise Low-impact exercises can help to improve the range of motion in your joints and increase your mobility. Exercise can also strengthen muscles, which can help to relieve some of the pressure from your joints. You may also want to try gentle yoga, which can help you regain strength and flexibility. Get enough rest You may need more rest during flare-ups and less during remission. Getting enough sleep will help to reduce inflammation and pain as well as fatigue. Apply heat or cold Ice packs or cold compresses can help to reduce inflammation and pain. They may also be effective against muscle spasms. You can alternate cold with hot treatments such as warm showers and hot compresses. This may help to reduce stiffness. Try assistive devices Certain devices such as splints and braces can hold your joints in a resting position. This may help to reduce inflammation, but it’s important to take breaks from using them to prevent “frozen joints” (contractors). Canes and crutches can help you maintain mobility, even during flares. You can also install household devices, such as grab bars and handrails in bathrooms and along staircases. Learn more about these and other remedies to help you manage life with RA. Rheumatoid arthritis diet Your healthcare provider or dietitian may recommend an anti-inflammatory diet to help with your symptoms. This type of diet includes foods that have lots of omega-3 fatty acids. Foods high in omega-3 fatty acids include: fatty fish like salmon, tuna, herring, and mackerel chia seeds flax seeds walnuts Antioxidants, such as vitamins A, C, and E, and selenium, may also help reduce inflammation. Foods high in antioxidants include: berries, such as blueberries, cranberries, goji berries, and strawberries dark chocolate spinach kidney beans pecans artichokes Eating lots of fiber is also important. Choose whole grain foods, fresh vegetables, and fresh fruit. Strawberries may be particularly beneficial. Foods containing flavonoids can also help to counter inflammation in the body. They include: soy products, such as tofu and miso berries green tea broccoli grapes What you don’t eat is just as important as what you do eat. Make sure to avoid trigger foods. These include processed carbohydrates and saturated or trans fats. Avoiding trigger foods and choosing the right foods when following an anti-inflammatory diet may help you manage your RA. Types of rheumatoid arthritis There are several different types of RA. Knowing which type you have may help your healthcare provider choose the best type of treatment for you. Types of RA include: Seropositive RA. If you have seropositive RA, you have a positive rheumatoid factor or anti-CCP blood test result. This means you have the antibodies that cause your immune system to attack joints. Seronegative RA. If you have a negative RF blood test result and a negative anti-CCP result, but you still have RA symptoms, you may have seronegative RA. You may eventually