Health Conditions Health Products Discover Tools Connect SUBSCRIBE 6 ways to make a wound heal faster Tips for faster wound healing Treating open wounds Should wounds be covered? Contacting a doctor Summary Most small wounds heal naturally with time, but home remedies — such as aloe vera, antibacterial ointment, or honey — may speed up the healing process. A wound leaves the body’s internal tissues exposed to the external environment. Cuts, blows, or other impacts are common causes. A person may be able to treat a minor wound at home. However, they should seek medical help if they have a more severe injury that involves broken bones or excessive bleeding. This article details six things people can try to make their wounds heal faster, and when to see a doctor. Please note, the methods outlined in this article are for cuts and scrapes that people can typically take care of at home. More serious, or deep wounds, will require medical attention. Was this helpful? Methods for making a wound heal faster Image credit: Jung-Pang Wu / Getty Images. The following are some alternative methods and remedies people can try to make wounds heal faster: 1. Antibacterial ointment A person can treat a wound with several over-the-counter (OTC) antibacterial ointments, which can help prevent infections. They can also help a wound heal more quickly. One review of 27 animal model studies showed that antibacterial treatments played a positive role in helping wounds heal faster. However, the review noted that there was a high risk of bias in the findings. People often use OTC antibacterial ointments for minor wounds, but they may not be necessary. A person may use petroleum jelly, which acts as a barrier to protect the wound beyond a waterproof bandage. 2. Aloe vera Aloe vera is a plant belonging to the cactus family. It contains a substance that is rich in both vitamins and minerals. Aloe vera contains glucomannan, a substance that helps cellular regeneration and causes the body to produce collagen. This substance is a protein that promotes wound healing. A 2019 systematic review states that aloe vera and its compounds could improve wound healing. Overall evidence suggests it might be effective for wound healing of first and second-degree burns. The review also indicates that aloe vera could help retain skin moisture and integrity while easing inflammation and preventing ulcers. A person can apply a thin layer of aloe vera gel to the wound area. They can also dress the wound in a bandage soaked in aloe vera gel to help with healing. Learn more about the health benefits of aloe vera here. 3. Honey Honey has antioxidant, antibacterial, and anti-inflammatory properties. People have used the substance in traditional wound-healing recipes for a long time. A 2016 review states thatlaboratory research suggests honey significantly improves the healing rate of wounds in animals. It also says that it reduced scar formation and inhibited bacterial growth in acute wounds and burns. In another older 2015 study, honey appeared to heal partial thickness wounds better than other treatments, but caused more infections in post-operative wounds than typical treatments. A person would need to use medical honey for minor and major wounds after a discussion with a doctor or healthcare professional. 4. Turmeric paste Turmeric is a spice that comes from the plant of the same name. It contains curcumin, which has antibacterial, antifungal, and anti-inflammatory properties. One 2016 review suggests that turmeric can be effective in helping wounds heal faster. It showed that the curcumin present in the spice stimulated the production of the growth factors involved in the healing process. It also showed that curcumin accelerated the management of wound restoration. A 2019 review also showed that curcumin in turmeric could increase collagen production at the wound site. It also states that curcumin promotes the differentiation of fibroblasts into myofibroblasts, which starts the healing process and helps the wound heal more quickly. A person can mix turmeric with warm water to make a paste. They can then apply the paste to the wound and cover it with a clean bandage. If a person wishes to try turmeric for a wound, they should limit usage to closed, minor wounds. An open injury would require medical-grade products with a doctor’s approval. Learn more about the health benefits of turmeric here. 5. Garlic Garlic contains the compound allicin, which has antimicrobial and anti-inflammatory properties. According to a 2020 review, several clinical trials have demonstrated the efficacy of garlic in treating wounds. It stated that in preclinical studies, aged garlic extract showed wound healing potential depending on the dosage. Another study looked at the use of garlic to treat wounds in rats. It revealed that a cream containing 0.4% garlic was an effective way to treat burn wounds, although further human studies are necessary. Learn more about the health benefits of garlic here. 6. Coconut oil Coconut oil contains the substance monolaurin, a fatty acid with antimicrobial properties. Fatty acids found in vegetable oils play a large part in helping wounds heal. A person can use coconut oil on a wound to help reduce the risk of contracting an infection. Learn more about the health benefits of coconut oil here. Treating an open wound A person with an open wound should always follow these steps: Wash the hands with soap and clean water. Remove jewelry and clothing from around the wound. Apply pressure to the wound to stop the bleeding. Clean the wound with clean water and a saline solution once the bleeding has stopped. Examine the wound for foreign objects and dirt. If possible, apply antibiotic ointment to the wound to prevent infection. Pat the wound dry with a clean cloth. Close the wound and apply an adhesive bandage or band-aid. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), a person should check their wound every 24 hours. This involves removing the bandages and checking for signs of infection. Afterward, they should disinfect the wound, dry it, and apply a clean adhesive bandage or band-aid. A closed wound that is not sterile can trap bacteria and may cause further infections. Therefore, if a person has an unclean wound or a wound with an infection, they should leave it open until they can clean it, or the infection clears. After treating a wound, several methods can promote healing. Learn more about types of wound healing. Should you cover wounds? Covered wounds, or wounds under bandages, tend to heal faster than those uncovered. Keeping wounds covered can: keep them clean reduce the chance of infections reduce the chance of irritation from clothing or activities keep the wound moist decrease the amount of pain Learn more about wound care. When to contact a doctor A person can often treat minor wounds at home. However, in some instances, wounds need medical attention. A person should seek care from a healthcare professional if they experience the following: a wound with large, deep, or jagged edges, which may require stitches and cleaning a wound that will not stay closed a wound that is full of debris that a person cannot remove wound resulting from an injury from a dirty, rusty, or contaminated object blood spurting from a wound a wound that continues to bleed, even after applying pressure a wound due to an animal or human bite A person should also speak with a doctor if their wound has contracted an infection. Signs of a wound acquiring an infection include: aches and pains the area around the wound is warm the wound gives off a yellow or green discharge the wound emits an unpleasant odor red streaks appear on the skin around the wound fever and chills nausea and vomiting A doctor will often use antibiotics to treat a wound with an infection. A person may also require a tetanus shot. People should always complete the entire course of antibiotics, even if infection symptoms are no longer present. This treats the infection fully and prevents bacteria from becoming resistant to the antibiotic. Learn more about infected wounds here. Summary Minor open wounds may not require medical treatment. However, people should clean the wound and dress it using a clean bandage. An unclean wound may cause a bacterial infection to occur. Once the wound is clean, there are several techniques to speed up the healing process. These include the use of antibacterial ointments, turmeric, aloe vera, garlic, and coconut oil. A person should seek medical help right away if their wound is large. A doctor may use stitches to close the wound and ensure that it is clean. Last medically reviewed on January 18, 2024 Blood / HematologyComplementary Medicine / Alternative MedicineFirst Aid How we reviewed this article: SOURCES Share this article Medically reviewed by Dominique Fontaine, BSN, RN, HNB-BC, HWNC-BC — By Adam Rowden — Updated on January 18, 2024 Latest news How to heal a deep cut inside the lower lip When to seek help First aid Treatment Aftercare Complications Prevention Summary Often, a person can take care of a deep cut inside the lower lip with first aid. If significant bleeding continues after applying pressure, then swift medical care may be necessary. Cuts inside the mouth heal faster than cuts elsewhere. They can still become infected, though, so getting the right medical care is important. In this article, we look at the symptoms of a deep cut inside the lip, how to perform first aid, and when to see a doctor. When to seek help Getty Images Cuts inside the lips typically bleed a lot and cause pain. Because of the blood, it can be hard to see how deep a cut is. Shallow cuts usually heal on their own without stitches, while deep cuts may require medical attention. Stitches may be necessary if the wound: is longer than half an inch has ragged or separated edges bleeds a lot for more than 5–10 minutes If there is so much blood that seeing the wound is not possible, apply pressure with a cloth, keep it held down, and seek medical attention. Also, seek medical attention if the cut: looks dirty was caused by an animal bite was caused by a puncture with a dirty object is extremely painful could have damaged other parts of the mouth or face If a cut is not new but has any of the characteristics above, contact a doctor as soon as possible. Cuts in the mouth can become infected, and symptoms include: swelling pus a fever A doctor may treat the infection with antibiotics. First aid Whether a person is waiting for medical treatment or caring for an oral injury at home, first aid can help stem the flow of blood and reduce the risk of infection. To perform first aid on a deep cut in the mouth: Wash the hands thoroughly. Apply pressure with a clean cloth or bandage for several minutes. Once the bleeding slows or stops, rinse the mouth with cool water to remove any particles from the wound. Try sucking on an ice cube to limit further bleeding and swelling. If the bleeding does not slow or stop after 5–10 minutes, the person may need professional care. Treatment How doctors treat a deep cut inside the lip will depend on the location and severity of the wound. But they usually begin by cleaning the wound with sterile water or saline and assessing the injury. Depending on the cause of the cut, the doctor may: Administer a local anesthetic so that they can inspect the wound more closely without causing pain. Order medical imaging tests to look for foreign objects that may be stuck in the wound. Prescribe antibiotics if there is a possibility of infection. Order a tetanus shot for a puncture wound, if the person has not had a tetanus booster in the last 5 years. The doctor may then seal the wound with stitches. They may also provide an antibiotic ointment to help the person keep the wound clean at home. Aftercare After receiving medical care, keeping the cut clean gives it the best chance of healing. The doctor will have provided specific advice, but aftercare may involve taking oral antibiotics or applying an antibiotic product, such as an ointment, to the cut. The person may also need pain relief