REP. ELISE STEFANIK, CHAIRWOMAN HOME ABOUT LATEST 118TH CONGRESS EN ESPAÑOL SUBSCRIBE Republican Policy Committee Chairman Gary Palmer Mr. Palmer, who grew up in Hackleburg, a small town in Northwest Alabama, now lives in Hoover and represents Alabama’s 6th Congressional District. Mr. Palmer attended the University of Alabama and was the first person on either side of his family to attend college. In addition, he was a walk-on member of the football team under legendary football coach Bear Bryant. After earning a B.S. in Operations Management, he worked in the private sector for 12 years; including nine with two major engineering construction companies, before involvement with Focus on the Family lead him to start the Alabama Family Alliance which later became the Alabama Policy Institute. Palmer served as President of the Alabama Policy Institute for 24 years. During his tenure, the Alabama Policy Institute became a full-spectrum public policy organization that engaged in virtually all policy issues that affected Alabamians. It is considered the premier conservative think-tank in Alabama. Palmer also was a founding member of the board of directors of the State Policy Network, an umbrella organization for various state-based think-tanks. He served on the State Policy Network board for six years, the last two as chairman. Leading this broad coalition of policy thinkers gave Palmer exposure and knowledge of policy problems that confront all 50 states. When State Policy Network was founded in 1992, there were fewer than 20 state think-tanks in their network. Today, State Policy Network has 65 member organizations. Palmer served on four different state commissions on behalf of three different Governors. He was appointed to the Welfare Reform Commission by Governor Fob James. He also served as an advisor to Governor James’ Aerospace, Science and Technology Task Force. He was appointed to the Task Force to Strengthen Alabama Families by Governor Bob Riley, and the Alabama Commission on Improving State Government by Governor Robert Bentley. In 2014, he was elected to the 114th Congress, having never served in office before. In Congress, Palmer is focused on paying down the national debt by cutting spending; regulatory reform by reducing the number and expense of federal regulations; lowering energy costs and spurring economic growth and job creation by accessing America’s vast energy resources; and replacing Obamacare with a health care plan that puts people back in charge of their health care decisions and that will truly make health care affordable and available; and protecting life in all its forms. Palmer serves on the House Energy and Commerce Committee as well as the Subcommittees on Energy, Environment and Climate Change, and Oversight and Investigations. Palmer has also served as the Chairman of the House Republican Policy Committee since the 116 th Congress. The Republican Policy Committee aims to unite Congressional Republicans on policy and help advise other members of leadership on policy decisions. Palmer has been a member of the Rotary Club of Birmingham since 1993, and he is a Paul Harris Fellow. He holds an Honorary Doctorate from the University of Mobile. He and his wife Ann live in Hoover, Alabama where they attend Briarwood Presbyterian Church in Birmingham, Alabama. They have three children, Claire, Kathleen and Rob. Get the Latest from the GOP SUBSCRIBE FIND YOUR REP EN ESPAÑOL GOP JOBS BANK House Republicans ABOUT Republican Members About Conference Steering Committee List for the 118th Congress Conference Rules of the 118th Congress LATEST NEWS Gas Prices Skyrocket 45% Under Joe Biden’s Watch Joe Biden & Far Left Democrats Are Running Away From Bidenomics But the American People Can’t The Biden Border Crisis is The Number One Issue Concerning Americans & Biden’s Biggest Failure As President House Republicans | Privacy Policy