REP. ELISE STEFANIK, CHAIRWOMAN HOME ABOUT LATEST 118TH CONGRESS EN ESPAÑOL SUBSCRIBE House Republican Conference Chair Elise Stefanik Congresswoman Elise Stefanik proudly represents New York's 21st District in the House of Representatives in her fifth term in office. In May 2021, Congresswoman Stefanik was elected by her colleagues to serve in House Leadership as Chair of the House Republican Conference. The Center for Effective Lawmaking ranked her in the top 10 most effective Republican members, and the #1 most effective for commerce policy impacting small businesses and workers. She is a senior member of the House Armed Services Committee, the Committee on Education the Workforce, the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and the Select Subcommittee on the Weaponization of the Federal Government. On the Armed Services Committee, Congresswoman Stefanik serves on the new Subcommittee on Cyber, Innovative Technologies, and Information Systems, and as a member of the subcommittee on Strategic Forces. On the Committee on Education and the Workforce, she serves on the Higher Education and Workforce Investment and Workforce Protections Subcommittees. Congresswoman Stefanik was born and raised in Upstate New York. Prior to serving in Congress, she worked at her family’s small business. Her upbringing taught her the hard work and perseverance necessary to build, operate and grow small businesses in the North Country. Congresswoman Stefanik graduated with Honors from Harvard University, as the first member of her immediate family to receive a college degree. From 2006 - 2009, Congresswoman Stefanik served in the West Wing of the White House on President George W. Bush's Domestic Policy Council Staff and in the Office of the Chief of Staff, where she assisted in overseeing the policy development process on all economic and domestic policy issues. Congresswoman Stefanik served as the Director of Vice-Presidential Debate Prep to Paul Ryan, and as the Director of Communications for the Foreign Policy Initiative. Elise’s family has owned a home on Lake Champlain in Essex County for over 30 years. Elise lives in Schuylerville with her husband Matt and their newborn son Sam. Get the Latest from the GOP SUBSCRIBE FIND YOUR REP EN ESPAÑOL GOP JOBS BANK House Republicans ABOUT Republican Members About Conference Steering Committee List for the 118th Congress Conference Rules of the 118th Congress LATEST NEWS Gas Prices Skyrocket 45% Under Joe Biden’s Watch Joe Biden & Far Left Democrats Are Running Away From Bidenomics But the American People Can’t The Biden Border Crisis is The Number One Issue Concerning Americans & Biden’s Biggest Failure As President House Republicans | Privacy Policy