REP. ELISE STEFANIK, CHAIRWOMAN HOME ABOUT LATEST 118TH CONGRESS EN ESPAÑOL SUBSCRIBE Conference Rules of the 118th Congress CONFERENCE RESOLUTION Resolved, that the following shall be the rules of the House Republican Conference for the 118th Congress: Rule 1—Conference Membership (a) Inclusion.—All Republican Members of the House of Representatives (including Delegates and the Resident Commissioner) and other Members of the House as determined by the Republican Conference of the House of Representatives (“the Conference”) shall be Members of the Conference. (b) Expulsion.—A ⅔ vote of the entire membership shall be necessary to expel a Member of the Conference. Proceedings for expulsion shall follow the rules of the House of Representatives, as nearly as practicable. Rule 2—Republican Leadership (a) Elected Leadership.—The Elected Republican Leaders of the House of Representatives are— (1) the Speaker; (2) the Republican Leader; (3) the Republican Whip; (4) the Chair of the Republican Conference; (5) the Chair of the National Republican Congressional Committee; (6) the Chair of the Committee on Policy; (7) the Vice-Chair of the Republican Conference; and, (8) the Secretary of the Republican Conference. (b) Designated Leadership.—The designated Republican Leaders of the House of Representatives are— (1) the Chair of the House Committee on Rules; (2) the Chief Deputy Whip; (3) one member of the sophomore class elected by the sophomore class; (4) one member of the freshman class elected by the freshman class; and (5) the Chair of the Elected Leadership Committee, if appointed by the Speaker. (c) Leadership Committee Limitation.— (1) The Speaker, Republican Leader, Whip, and the Chairs of the Republican Conference and the National Republican Congressional Committee shall not serve on more than one standing committee or subcommittee of the House of Representatives and in no case shall any of these individuals serve as chair of a standing committee of the House of Representatives. Upon the recommendation of the Steering Committee and the approval of the Conference this provision may be waived. (2) If a Member shall, at any time, cease to serve in any of the Leadership positions named above, he or she may resume his or her position on the standing committee on which he or she previously served. (3) If a member of Elected Republican Leadership as described in rule 2(a) publicly announces his or her intention to seek other elected office in Federal, state, or local government, that Member shall resign from such leadership position. That position shall be filled pursuant to rule 2(e) of the Conference rules. (d) Authority and Responsibilities in the Minority.— (1) The Speaker and Republican Leader.—During any time that the Republican Party is not the majority party of the House of Representatives, the office of Speaker shall be considered as vacant, and any reference to, or authority vested in, the Speaker under these rules shall be considered references to and authority vested in the Republican Leader. (2) Committee Chairs and Ranking Republican Members.—During any time that the Republican Party is not the majority party of the House of Representatives, any reference to, responsibility of, or authority vested in, the chair of a committee of the House in these rules shall be considered a reference to, responsibility of, or authority vested in the Ranking Republican Member of such committee. (e) Vacancies in Elected Leadership.—In the event of a vacancy in an office described in paragraph (a) (other than a vacancy addressed by rule 26), that vacancy shall be filled in the manner described in rules 3 and 4 as though as a continuation of the organizational meeting under rule 3(a). Rule 3—Organizing Conference (a) Organizing Conference.—The organizational meeting of the Conference shall be called by the Speaker, except as otherwise provided by law. The meeting shall be held not later than the 20th day of December. (b) Order of Elections.—At the organizational meeting of the Republican Conference, the Conference shall nominate and elect the Elected Leadership for that Congress in the following order— (1) the Speaker; (2) the Republican Leader; (3) the Republican Whip; (4) the Chair of the Republican Conference; (5) the Chair of the National Republican Congressional Committee; (6) the Chair of the Committee on Policy; (7) the Vice-Chair of the Republican Conference; and, (8) the Secretary of the Republican Conference. Except that during any time that the Republican Party is not the majority party of the House of Representatives, there shall be no election held for the office of Speaker. (c) Prior to the convening of the organizational meeting called pursuant to paragraph (a), the current Chair of the Republican Conference shall call a meeting to provide each of the announced candidates for Elected Leadership time to make an oral presentation and entertain questions from Members of the Conference. In establishing the time, date, and format of such meeting, the Chair shall consult with all announced candidates for Elected Leadership and a cross-section of Members of the Conference. Rule 4—Conference Election Procedures (a) Votes by Secret Ballot.—All contested elections shall be decided by secret ballot, and no proxy voting shall be allowed. (b) Nominations.— (1) Candidates for office shall be nominated in alphabetical surname order. (2) For each Leadership nomination there shall be one nominating speech (not to exceed three minutes in length), and there may be two seconding speeches (each not to exceed one minute in length). (c) Balloting Procedures.—When there are more than two candidates for any office and none receives a majority of the votes on the first ballot, a quorum being present, the candidate with the lowest number of votes on that and each succeeding ballot will be dropped from the ballot until one candidate receives a majority of the votes, a quorum being present. Rule 5—Conference Meetings (a) Call and Notice.— Meetings of the Republican Conference may be called at any time by the chair of the Conference, after consultation with the Speaker. (b) Speaker’s Annual Meeting.—The Speaker shall hold an annual Meeting at the beginning of each session of Congress at which the Republican Leadership shall report to the Membership on their plans for the upcoming session. (c) With respect to a meeting called under this rule, whenever possible, at least 24 hours notice of the time, place, and agenda of a meeting shall be given to Members of the Conference. (d) Decorum.—Meetings of the Republican Conference shall be conducted in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Rules of the House of Representatives, including rule XVII, that govern decorum and the personal behavior of the Members of the Conference. (e) Speakers.— (1) Elected Leadership shall aim to limit their allotted time at the start of the meeting to twenty minutes but shall not exceed thirty minutes to update the Membership. (2) If Elected Leadership requires additional time, they shall wait until all Members of the Republican Conference wishing to be heard have spoken. (3) 30 Members of the Conference may designate a single Member to address the Conference for three minutes at the start of open mic. (A) A signed letter designating a Member to claim this time must be submitted to the Chair prior to the start of the meeting. (B) Members signing the designation letter may not participate in open mic. (C) Members may only sign one designation letter per Conference meeting. Rule 6—Rules of Procedure and Order of Business (a) Rules of the House.—The Rules of the House of Representatives, insofar as they are applicable, shall govern the proceedings of the Republican Conference. (b) Motions.— (1) No motion shall be available other than those described in clause 4 of rule XVI (relating to the precedence of motions) or rule XIX (relating to motions after the amendment stage) of the Rules of the House of Representatives. (2) When a motion has been made and carried or lost, it shall be in order for any member of the prevailing side, in the same or succeeding meeting of the Republican Conference, to move for the reconsideration thereof. The procedures for reconsideration shall be consistent with the Rules of the House. (c) Resolutions.— (1) Any matter to be considered by the Republican Conference shall be in the form of a resolution. (2)(A) Referral of resolutions, generally.—Except as provided in subparagraphs (3) and (4), all resolutions brought before the Republican Conference shall be referred by the Chair to the appropriate committee for consideration. (B) Resolutions proposing a change in Republican Conference rules.— (i) A resolution proposing a change to the rules of the Republican Conference shall be referred to an ad hoc committee for the purpose of consideration of that measure except as provided for in subparagraph 4. (ii) The committee shall be appointed by the Speaker and chaired by the senior Republican member of the Committee on Rules of the House. (iii) In making the appointments under this subparagraph, the Speaker shall appoint at least one Member who is a proponent of the resolution. (3) Precedence of resolutions offered by the Speaker.—The Speaker, or a designee, may present any resolution to the Conference for its immediate consideration. (4) Privileged resolutions offered by any Member.—Any Member may present a resolution to the Conference for its expedited consideration if— (A) The resolution proposes a change to the rules of the Republican Conference which would be referred pursuant to subparagraph (2)(B)(i) of this rule, or pertains to expulsion, pursuant to rule 1(b). (B) The resolution is submitted with the signatures of at least 25 percent of the Republican Conference. (C) Consideration of a resolution under this subparagraph shall occur no later than the next Conference meeting pursuant to the layover requirements of clause 2(a)(1) of House Rule IX. (d) Petitions.— (1) Discharge of committee of the Republican Conference.— (A) A resolution which has 25 or more signatures of Members shall be considered by the appropriate committee of the Republican Conference as soon as practicable, but not later than 7 legislative days, and reported back to the Conference. (B) If the resolution is not acted on by the committee to which it was referred as soon as practicable, but not later than 7 legislative days, a petition of 50 or more Members will discharge the resolution for consideration before the Conference. (2) Petition for a special meeting.— (A) If 20 percent of the Members of the Republican Conference petition the Chair for a special meeting of the Conference, the Chair shall schedule such special meeting as soon as practicable, but not later than 10 legislative days. (B) If 50 Members of the Republican Conference petition the Chair for a special meeting of the Conference on a major piece of legislation, the Chair shall schedule such special meeting prior to a House vote on the legislation. The petition must be submitted to the Chair prior to the start of the Committee on Rules meeting on the legislation. (C) The Chair shall provide a means by which Members may submit such petitions or other evidence of support electronically. (e) Suspension Procedure.—Two-thirds of the Members voting, a quorum being present, may suspend the Conference rules. All motions to suspend the rules shall be seconded by a majority, if demanded. The consideration of a motion to suspend the rules, to the extent practicable, shall follow the rules of the House. Rule 7—Conference Meetings: Quorum A majority of the Members of the Conference shall constitute a quorum. Rule 8—Conference Meetings: Secret Ballot On demand of one Member, with the support of five others, the vote on any matter properly pending before the Conference shall be taken by secret ballot. Rule 9—Conference Meetings: Admittance (a) The Chair may decide whether meetings of the Conference shall be open or closed to the public, subject to an appeal by any Member. (b) The Chair may designate Leadership staff or other eligible persons to attend Conference meetings which are closed to the public. Those individuals shall be excused at the discretion of the Chair. (c) Upon timely notice from the Chair, an executive session of the Conference may be called. This meeting shall be closed to all persons except Members of the Conference. (d) On the demand of one Member, with the support of 25 others, a Conference meeting shall be taken into executive session. Rule 10—Conference Meetings: Journal The Secretary of the Conference shall keep a journal of the Conference proceedings and each journal entry shall be signed by the Conference Secretary and the