DNC WHO WE ARE WHERE WE STAND TAKE ACTION VOTE SHOP DONATE EN ESPAÑOL ABOUT THE DEMOCRATIC PARTY facebook twitter email Our Party Since 1848, the Democratic National Committee has been the home of the Democratic Party, the oldest continuing party in the United States. Today, we are millions of supporters strong, leading with our values, fighting for progress, and helping elect Democrats in every state, city, and ZIP code — from local office to the Oval Office. Our party is strong because it’s built on advancing our Democratic platform and forging positive solutions that include everyone. As Democrats, we believe that every person in this nation should be treated with dignity and respect. We believe that health care is a right for all and that we should be rewarding the hard work of middle class families. We believe that our schools and streets should be free from gun violence and that a woman’s decisions about her own body are hers to make. As the DNC, we are working together to build a bright future for everyone. We are fighting for the soul of our country, for the heart of our democracy, and for America’s place as the land of opportunity for all. P: 202-863-8000 E: democraticparty@democrats.org 430 S Capitol St SE Washington, DC 20003 About the Committees Democratic National Committee The Democratic National Committee, or DNC, was created during the Democratic National Convention of 1848, and is governed by its Charter and Bylaws. For 171 years, it’s been responsible for governing the Democratic Party and is the oldest continuing party committee in the United States. Under the leadership of Chair Jaime Harrison, the DNC is composed of the chairs and vice-chairs of each state Democratic Party Committee and over 200 members elected by Democrats in all 57 states and the territories. Democratic Association of Secretaries of State The Democratic Association of Secretaries of State is the only organization dedicated to electing Democratic candidates to the office of secretary of state. The mission of DASS is to assist Democratic secretary of state candidates through political support that includes campaign contributions, fundraising, and independent expenditure campaigns where appropriate, along with policy training and coordination for candidates and sitting secretaries of state. Democratic Attorneys General Association The Democratic Attorneys General Association is the only party committee solely dedicated to electing and supporting Democratic state attorneys general. Democrats currently hold 25 state attorneys general seats and represent the majority of Americans. This is the most diverse coalition of Democratic attorneys general in history. Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee The Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, or DCCC, serves as the official national Democratic campaign committee charged with recruiting, assisting, funding, and electing Democrats to the U.S. House of Representatives. They provide services that include designing and helping execute field operations, polling, creating radio and television commercials, fundraising, communications, and management consulting. Democratic Governors Association The Democratic Governors Association is an independent voluntary political organization that supports Democratic governors and candidates nationwide. As the only party organization dedicated solely to electing Democratic governors, the DGA participates at all levels of campaigns, from providing resources to fund operations to helping articulate and deliver their messages. Democratic Legislative Campaign Committee The Democratic Legislative Campaign Committee, or DLCC, works to win state legislative seats and chambers for Democrats. The DLCC’s mission is to build and maintain winning, state-of-the-art campaign committees through a continuing partnership with legislative leaders, professional staff, and supporters. Democratic Lieutenant Governors Association The Democratic Lieutenant Governors Association (DLGA) is the only organization solely focused on electing Democratic lieutenant governors and candidates each year. Democratic Mayors Association The Democratic Mayors Association is comprised of mayors in cities of 30,000 or more – a diverse coalition of innovative leaders who get things done. As a 527 organization, DMA mobilizes mayors on behalf of progressive issues and unite them with a common voice to take on the most critical challenges communities face. DMA convenes local leaders with private sector and labor partners to develop creative solutions. Democratic Municipal Officials Democratic Municipal Officials (DMO) is a national association of elected Mayors, City Council Members, School Board Members, and other municipal leaders who identify with the values of the Democratic Party. As a constituency organization of the Democratic National Committee (DNC), Democratic Municipal Officials is the Democratic voice in local politics and the local voice in Democratic politics. DMO accomplishes its mission to connect, elect, and empower municipal elected officials by leveraging its national network of members, alumni, and strategic partners. DMO is the fastest-growing organization within the Democratic Party and the largest coalition of Democratic officials in the United States. Representing municipal officials from cities, towns, villages, townships, and boroughs across the country, DMO gives a voice to those officials who engage with their communities the most, and who have a uniquely tangible impact on the direction of the cities they represent. Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee The Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, or DSCC, serves as the official national Democratic campaign dedicated solely to electing Democrats to the United States Senate. From grassroots organizing, to candidate recruitment, to providing campaign funds for tight races, the DSCC works hard all year, every year to elect Democrats to the U.S. Senate. Democratic Treasurers Association The Democratic Treasurers Association is dedicated to electing and supporting Democratic state treasurers. The elected Democratic state treasurers oversee more than a trillion dollars of investments held in state operating funds and pension funds. Individually and as a group they are powerful advocates with a unique ability to exert influence that defies the constraints of the electoral map. National Democratic County Officials The National Democratic County Officials (NDCO) is the official campaign arm of the Democratic Party dedicated to electing Democrats at the county level. NDCO represents and supports a broad diversity of elected officials from all corners of this nation: rural, urban and suburban. NDCO provides training and campaign support to elect first-time office holders and reelect incumbent Democrats. With the help of NDCO, Democrats are able to run successful campaigns for county office in states all over the country. The ASDC The ASDC’s mission is to help build robust state parties in order to elect Democrats from local office to the Oval Office. To accomplish this goal, the ASDC focuses exclusively on the current and future needs of state Democratic parties. It acts as a service organization responsible for supporting and educating its members and state party executive directors and staff. DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL COMMITTEE Join Us Sign up to get texts. By entering your phone number, you are consenting to receive recurring automated text messages & calls from the DNC with news & info about our work. For SMS, message & data rates may apply. Text STOP to end. Text HELP for help. Privacy policy & ToS. SUBMIT Who we are What we do Who we serve Our history About the Democratic Party Leadership State Parties Where we stand Party platform The issues Take action Events Trainings Work with us Vote Shop Donate Donate by Mail Contact us Press releases Privacy policy Terms of service Submission Terms Copyright © 2024 DNC Services Corporation All rights reserved. Paid for by the DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL COMMITTEE (202) 863-8000 This communication is not authorized by any candidate or candidate's committee. DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL COMMITTEE 430 South Capitol Street Southeast Washington, DC 20003 Proudly Powered by WordPress