English Log in Sell Fulfil Pricing Grow Learn Sign up LEARN Want to know everything there is to know about e-commerce? Let us tell you! Sign up €39 a month (excluding VAT). What is e-commerce? E-commerce: the past, present and future of commerce What types of e-commerce are there? What are the different types of e-commerce model? What are the advantages and disadvantages of e-commerce? Steps to create your own e-commerce business How can you make your business a success? Marketing, fulfilment strategy, stock, etc. Conclusion FAQs As a result of the boom in e-commerce, more and more traditional businesses are also making the leap into the digital world. This allows them to reach a much larger audience and to broaden their commercial horizons. If you are also considering creating a company to market your products or services online, there are several things you should know before taking the first step. It is important to acquire specific e-commerce training in order to succeed on your digital journey, such as the free training offered through the Amazon Despega programme. As a starting point, this guide will provide you with a full definition of e-commerce, its origin and history, the different e-commerce models that exist and how they are classified, and their main advantages and disadvantages. We also offer you some fundamental guidelines for you to set up an e-commerce business and start selling online, as well as lots of tips and guidelines on how to create a successful e-commerce business using marketing tools, the right fulfilment strategy, efficient inventory management etc. What is e-commerce? E-commerce, a term that is widely used online by digital users, is the process of buying and selling products and services over the Internet. Under this business model, which has boomed over the last decade, customers can make their purchases from a mobile device, tablet or computer, as well as from smartwatches and digital assistants, like Amazon's Echo devices. All you need is an Internet connection and then you can visit any kind of digital store, where the range of products and services is truly endless, from food and fashion to appliances and books. If the product in question exists, there is an e-commerce store that sells it. And it's only a few clicks away. E-commerce should not be confused with e-business, which encompasses all kinds of companies that operate on the Internet and that use communication technologies to conduct their business and improve their efficiency and reach through marketing tools, for example. In other words, e-business is not just limited to buying and selling products but also includes other activities that form part of a business's operations. E-commerce: the past, present and future of commerce There is no doubt that digital commerce is still booming. And not just in Spain; this type of business has seen global growth since the beginning of the coronavirus pandemic in the first quarter of 2020. In Spain, for example, 23% of all purchases in 2020 were made via the Internet. In fact, by the end of the first year of the pandemic, e-commerce became the solution that allowed us to continue doing our everyday shopping while protecting each other. Being unable to leave our homes and the closure of physical stores in many countries contributed to this increase in shopping online. However, although many users have recently started shopping for the first time online, the concept of e-commerce is actually a century old, dating back to around 1920 with the beginning of catalogue sales in the United States. With this new business model, it was possible to purchase a product without physically having seen it or having to go to the actual point of sale. This innovation offered advantages for both parties, as the customer didn't have to travel and the brand had the opportunity to sell its products to potential customers living in other areas/cities. Later, as telephones and televisions in homes became the norm, along with the development of the first credit cards and the exchange of electronic data, it became even easier for companies to sell products without direct contact with the customer. Television sales, which took off in the 1980s, became an improved version of catalogue sales, as television advertisements offered greater realism and a much more detailed description of the functions and features of the product being advertised. But, without a doubt, the greatest revolution in e-commerce was the arrival of the Internet in homes in the 1990s. As it expanded, the first online shopping portals were born, which organised products into categories. Over the years, the use of the Internet became more and more normalised, as more and more platforms emerged for online shopping. Nowadays, the global turnover for online sales is growing year after year, and e-commerce has become a major channel for making purchases. In 2019, 75% of all Internet users worldwide had made a purchase online, and half of these confirmed having done so through a mobile device. This upward trend means that more and more people are deciding to buy online and, for this reason, different e-commerce models have emerged, including those explained below. What types of e-commerce are there? Depending on the actors involved in the purchase and sale of products and services, e-commerce is divided into different classes: B2B e-commerce On the one hand, we have business-to-business or B2B e-commerce. In this model, transactions are carried out between companies operating on the Internet, i.e. the end customer is not involved. Most wholesale or distribution businesses belong to the B2B model. B2C e-commerce On the other hand, business-to-consumer or B2C e-commerce is carried out between the company and the end customer. A consumer visits an e-commerce store to purchase a product or service for themselves. C2C e-commerce When the agents involved in the purchase of the product or service are two consumers, it is C2C (consumer-to-consumer) e-commerce. This type of business is usually considered more as a platform to advertise second-hand products than as a regular online store. The main advantage of the C2C model is that it favours the reuse of products, such as clothing, and the option to purchase them at a lower price. C2B e-commerce The fourth model, where the consumer is also the origin, is the C2B (consumer-to-business) model. Unlike C2C, where both parties are consumers, the destination of C2B transactions is the company. That is, the customers themselves are the ones who generate value for the companies. Affiliate programmes are a clear example of this e-commerce model, where e-commerce customers receive a payment or benefit for sharing a link to an online business that then results in another customer making a purchase at the store in question. These links are often promoted on blogs, forums and social media, and are an important part of the marketing strategies of many digital companies today. B2E e-commerce The business-to-employee or B2E e-commerce model involves a company and its employees; that is, transactions are carried out internally. This model is very common in large corporations that can offer their workers advantages such as discounts and offers for good performance or for meeting objectives. G2C e-commerce Finally, there is an e-commerce model that also includes the government: government-to-citizen or G2C e-commerce allows consumers to pay fines or taxes, for example, as well as carry out administrative procedures such as requesting and sending official documents. What are the different types of e-commerce model? Now that it's clear that e-commerce is here to stay, if you want to create your own digital business, or want your existing online store to go global, then keep reading. The term "business model" refers to the way companies generate value. In addition to the traditional system of buying and selling products or services, companies that operate online also use other models such as: Dropshipping This is a widespread model in e-commerce that is based on the company that sells the product to the customer not having said product in stock, but rather acquiring it from a third party, who ships the product directly to the end customer. In this model, e-commerce acts like a shop window. Marketplace This is an online service where buyers and selling partners come together. Buyers have access to a wide range of products and services, and selling partners can reach a multitude of potential buyers. Auctions Auction portals are electronic stores that connect consumers with either businesses or other consumers in exchange for a percentage of the sale when it occurs. The main advantage for selling partners is the wide reach of their ads. Freemium This model arises from combining the words "free" and "premium" and consists of offering basic service packages free of charge but with advertising, and paid premium packages, which offer more features and usually eliminate disadvantages such as ads. Subscription This model is widely used on entertainment platforms, where a product or service with restricted access is provided for a fixed monthly or annual fee. In the case of Amazon, its paid subscription programme, Amazon Prime, already has more than 150 million subscribers globally. The platform aims to double that figure in just five years. Basics for Selling on Amazon Find out everything you need to know to sell on Amazon with our tips! We'll walk you through the process from registering to making a sale. What are the advantages and disadvantages of e-commerce? Like any revolution, e-commerce has many advantages for society, but undeniably also has certain drawbacks. Below is a brief analysis of the most noteworthy pros and cons: ADVANTAGES DRAWBACKS The disappearance of geographical boundaries: With e-commerce, companies have been able to reach even the most remote places. People who live in rural areas are now able to get any product or service delivered to their doorstep without the hassle of having to travel long distances. By the same token, companies have managed to increase their potential customer base. Reduction in time spent buying: As distances disappear, shopping time is also reduced, as customers don't have to go to a physical store. In just a few minutes, they can visit dozens of online stores in search of the perfect item, with all the convenience and savings that provides. 24-hour availability: E-commerce operates without set opening hours or holidays, in contrast to the often limited hours of conventional commerce. Increased clientele: If there is one thing that the Internet offers, it's visibility. As such, many companies have succeeded in boosting their sales thanks to online advertising, social media and a comprehensive network-based marketing strategy. Ease of finding products: E-commerce has undoubtedly made it easier for customers to find the right product for them. Online sales platforms provide a huge catalogue of products, allowing customers to compare many different items at the same time. Ease of advertising products: Sellers have also come up with a solution that streamlines the process of marketing a product. A few photos or videos are enough to present any item to the market. Easier entrepreneurship and maintenance: Setting up an online store is completely different to opening a physical establishment, in particular in terms of cost. In addition, maintenance costs are also lower. Resistance to take the plunge: Many consumers, especially older ones, are very reluctant to jump into online shopping. The fear of not seeing the product in person and of Internet scams are the main reasons for them rejecting the change. Inability to test the product: The resistance we mentioned in the previous point is often due to potential customers not being able to see or touch the product before buying it. Increase in the price of the product due to shipping costs: Buying a high-priced item is usually not a problem. But things change when what we're looking for is a very low-priced product that isn't worth the high shipping costs. Customer loyalty: The impersonality of the purchasing process and the enormous amount of competition make customer loyalty an arduous task. Businesses need an appropriate marketing strategy that differentiates them from their competitors. Steps to create your own e-commerce business As with the creation of any business, the most important thing is to carry out an analysis of the environment. Is there a lot of competitiveness? How can I stand out? What are the legal requirements for the type of business I want to create?