Tendencias Reservas Próximos lanzamientos Soporte 24/7 PC Playstation Xbox Nintendo Guilty Gear Xrd REV 2 Deluxe Edition Steam En stock Descarga digital PC Deluxe Edición 42€ -83% 6.97€ Añadir a la cesta Enlace copiado Acerca de Get ready to rock again! Guilty Gear Xrd REV 2 includes new fighters, moves, story chapters and more! It’s never been a better time to be a 2.5D brawler in the post apocalypse! Hone your skills with an eclectic cast of 25 insane fighters and prove your mettle as the ultimate fighting master. Revolutionary 3D cell-animation graphics further refined, and more game contents added! The next-generation fighting game "Guilty Gear Xrd REV 2" is now out on Steam! Carrying on the legacy from 1998... Leer más 10 Basada en 3 reviews Instalación: Cómo activar tu producto Idiomas: Chino, Inglés, Japonés, Coreano Desarrollador: Arc System Works Distribuidor: Arc System Works Fecha de lanzamiento: 14 diciembre 2016 Género: Un solo jugador, Acción Reseñas recientes en Steam: Muy positivas (71) Todas las reseñas en Steam: Muy positivas (6991) Tags de usuario*: STEAM DECK VERIFIED FIGHTING ANIME 2D FIGHTER ... Ediciones Deluxe Edición Guilty Gear Xrd REV 2 Additional Playable Characters System Voice Pack Character Colors Pack Arrange Costume Set 42€ -83% 6.97€ Añadir a la cesta Standard Edición Guilty Gear Xrd REV 2 28€ -54% 10.21€ Añadir a la cesta Visuales Descripción Deluxe Edición incluye - Guilty Gear Xrd REV 2 - Additional Playable Characters - System Voice Pack - Character Colors Pack - Arrange Costume Set Get ready to rock again! Guilty Gear Xrd REV 2 includes new fighters, moves, story chapters and more! It’s never been a better time to be a 2.5D brawler in the post apocalypse! Hone your skills with an eclectic cast of 25 insane fighters and prove your mettle as the ultimate fighting master. Revolutionary 3D cell-animation graphics further refined, and more game contents added! The next-generation fighting game "Guilty Gear Xrd REV 2" is now out on Steam! Carrying on the legacy from 1998, comes the next addition to the "Guilty Gear" series! All visuals have been tweaked to the finest detail and hand-polished by the animation masters to produce the top quality hand-drawn anime effect! Game contents revamped to provide for gamers of all skill levels, you cannot miss out on this one! In "REVELATOR" we have 6 new characters from the previous of the series, namely "Johnny", "Jack-O'", "Kuradoberi Jam", "Kum Haehyun", "Raven" and "Dizzy". Followed by an upgrade to "REV 2", featuring 2 more new characters "Baiken" and "Answer", coming to a total of 25 characters! Beginners can feel at ease with our step-by-step training program, from Tutorial Mode being remodified into an action game to learn the ropes, to the introduction of Stylish Mode that allows easy inputs for Special Attacks, and many more! You can also visit the in-game FAQ to find out answers to popular questions on how to get strong! For players who already somewhat know their bearings in Fighting Games, we have the COMBO mode to teach all characters' worth of their combo potentials, and the MISSION mode to teach about the characters' general tactics and techniques. There's also the staple "TRAINING" mode, equipped with tons of features that allow you to recreate the situation of your choice, so as to allow you to train and research! The well-received STORY mode is now back with more punch! Fully cinematic with the 3D graphics engine, explore the lore and find out.. the REVELATIONS of "Guilty Gear". There's also a short introduction to the past series at the start of the story mode, so players new to the series need not fret! Place your personal ranking score on the stake and battle with other players in "Rank Match", or simply enjoy the new "Player Match" mode without any frets! In "Player Match" mode, you can walk around with your own customizable avatars and communicate with other players in the 3D room environment. You can also place an entry in the "Rank Match" and proceed to play other offline game modes such as TRAINING mode, while waiting for your entry to be paired up. The replays stored from your matches do not only show the match as-is, but you can also view both you and your opponent's key inputs, and you can change the camera angle to view the battle from a different perspective! Don't know where to put in your effort? We'll show you the way! Be a formidable player in no time with our content-packed support features, in "Guilty Gear Xrd REV 2"! Configuración mínima* OS *: Windows 7 / 8.1 / 10 (32bit/64bit) Processor: Intel Core i5 @ 2.0 GHz Memory: 2 GB RAM Graphics: Nvidia GeForce GTX 560 / Radeon HD 7770 DirectX: Version 9.0c Network: Broadband Internet connection Storage: 12 GB available space Guilty Gear franquicia -89% Guilty Gear 2 Overture Fecha de lanzamiento: 2016 2.24€ -94% Guilty Gear Xrd: Sign Fecha de lanzamiento: 2015 1.78€ -81% Guilty Gear Isuka Fecha de lanzamiento: 2006 1.67€ -89% Guilty Gear X2 Reload Fecha de lanzamiento: 2004 1.00€ Productos similares -92% Ultra Street Fighter IV 2.28€ -91% Melty Blood Actress Again Current Code 2.16€ -86% Tekken 7 5.79€ -77% Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3 5.63€ -90% Dragon Ball FighterZ 6.29€ -85% BlazBlue: Cross Tag Battle 5.26€ -77% BlazBlue: Centralfiction 8.68€ -90% BlazBlue: Chronophantasma Extend 2.93€ -85% UNDER NIGHT IN-BIRTH Exe:Late[st] 5.26€ 3 comentarios Rápido, eficaz, un gusto comprar así, seguid así chicos! Hace 4 años Inmediato Hace 4 años 10/10 Hace 4 años Reviews Todos los idiomas 10 Puntuación media de las reviews basada en 3 reviews ¡Valora este juego! Reviews recientes Un juego muy bueno graficamente . en combos personajes lo unico malo para mi personalmente seria la historia o el modo historia del resto esta muy bien , a y que deberian traducir el juego pero eso ya es algo personal xdd graficos buenos diseños de personajes la historia ¿Útil? 0 Leer más *Los tags y los requisitos están incluidos solo con fines informativos ¡No te pierdas ninguna oferta o promoción! ¡Y sé el primero en recibir nuestras ofertas privadas, newsletters y promociones de la semana! ¡Suscríbete! Términos y condiciones Política de privacidad Contacto Canjear una tarjeta regalo Descubre las últimas noticias de videojuegos Copyright © 2024 Instant Gaming - All rights reserved España Español EUR Última compra de este producto: hace 16 horas