IGN Logo Skip to content The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim Guide START TRACKING PROGRESS Create a free account or Log in. Find in guide Interactive Maps MINING Mining Corundum Dwarven Materials Ebony Gold Iron Malachite Moonstone Orichalcum Quicksilver Silver Steel Join for free or log in The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim Guide Guide Maps Gold BY STEPHANIE LEE, HECTOR MADRIGAL, BRENDAN GRAEBER, +162.5K MORE UPDATED OCT 13, 2016 + − View Interactive Map Gold, while not particularly useful for crafting your standard armor fare, is essential when crafting jewelry and other bits of pretty to sell at the market. Skyrim: How To Get Missable Daedric Artifacts 3:28 Autoplay setting: On Skyrim: How To Get Missable Daedric Artifacts Overview To mine ores, you must have a pickaxe in your inventory. You don't need to equip it; just have it with you. Mines usually have pickaxes lying around and also you can purchase them from major merchants and stores. ADVERTISEMENT Mining Locations Kolskeggr Mine If you were looking for the motherload of gold in Skyrim, look no further; this mine is absolutely packed with gold ore veins. But, it is also packed with druidic Forsworn, who can be a little tenacious if they've got a spellcaster. So, put your adventuring gloves on, and clear them out for a 1000 gold-coin reward from the mine's owner in Markarth. Not too shabby. Darkshade One ore vein is located outside the entrance of Darkshade. About one minute into the cave there will be another gold vein. Another is next to the waterfall on the right. Lost Prospect Mine East of Riften, and just a little Norh. Almost to the edge of Skyrim. Contains 3 hidden Ores, Behind the water fall. Can be jumped to from a ledge. Labyrinthian (South of Morthal) contains only couple of gold ore veins. Can be found deep inside and missed easily. Up Next: Iron Previous EBONY Next IRON Top Guide Sections Main Quests Side Quests Locations Items Was this guide helpful? Leave feedback In This Guide The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim BETHESDA GAME STUDIOS NOV 10, 2011 ESRB: Mature PlayStation 5 Xbox Series X|S Nintendo Switch PC +4 Rate this game RELATED GUIDES Overview Main Quests Side Quests Locations Conversation Have fun. Don't be mean. Feel free to criticize ideas, not people. Report bad behavior. Read our community guidelines. No one seems to have shared their thoughts on this topic yet Leave a comment so your voice will be heard first. Powered by TermsPrivacyFeedback Popular in the Community AdChoices Sponsored Sony Reportedly Pauses PlayStation VR2 Production to Clear Backlog of Unsold Units - IGN CaptainDunbrody Well done Sony, I got it not long after launch.Seeing how well it was supported I think I will be skipping on next-gen Sony console altogether. Top Comment 2 America's Founding Fathers on Film and TV, From Hamilton to Franklin - IGN Jboner Our founding fathers would be ashamed amd embarrassed by the current state of the country. That their beautiful and amazing constitution is constantly attacked, questioned and fought is sad. They were brilliant to have formed such an amazing union and put forth a legislative body that is the crown for fair governing and allowing it citizens actual freedom. It is truly sad to see the treasonous attitudes toward our formation of a country and its current state and future. Top Comment 8 Drake Bell Details 'Extensive' Sexual Abuse by Childhood Dialogue Coach, Nickelodeon Issues Statement - IGN zaihed19 Only 16 months in prison?? Even 16 years would be too short of a sentence. While I don’t condone the stuff Drake did with that minor a few years back I do sympathize with what he went through. Nobody, absolutely nobody should be sexually abused or assaulted. Top Comment 30 10 Movies Like Inception That Will Bend Your Mind - IGN SpicyMichael Off the top of my head, I'd nominate eXistenZ (1999), A Clockwork Orange (1971), Dark City (1998), Waking Life (2001), and Fallen (1998). Top Comment 4 An Ode To The Fictional Women the Streaming Era Killed - IGN maddogtannen316 "at least 120 shows were cancelled across streaming, but i'll single these out to shape my narrative for women's month." i always held out hope that ign wouldnt turn into polygon/kotaku. it's just disappointing Top Comment 38 Reviews•Best Picks•How to Romance Tifa in FF7 Rebirth•News•GTA 5 Cheats•IGN Store•HowLongToBeat•Deals•Contact Us•Guides•IGN YouTube•IGN TikTok•IGN Twitter•Map Genie IGN supports Group Black and its mission to increase greater diversity in media voices and media ownership. Group Black's collective includes Cxmmunity, Black Women Talk Tech and AFROPUNK