HOME GENERAL CHARACTER EQUIPMENT WORLD GUIDES VIP Guest Help Join VIP to remove all ads and videos Enshrouded Gameplay Breakdown - A Soulslike Game of Survival in Third Person 00:01 / 10:16 CHARACTER CREATION | BALDURS GATE 3 WIKI 23 44 … Character Information Updated: 09 Jan 2024 07:23 Character Creation in Baldur's Gate 3 covers information regarding the customization mechanic for creating a character. The customization may allow you to freely choose the appearance of your character, from selecting the gender, and race, to choosing various parts of the facial structure, body appearance, and many more. Character Customization in Baldur's Gate 3 expands beyond simple aesthetic choices but creates the personality and the core of the character which will in turn affect the game. The game will react to your character combination based on your Race, Background, and Class. This will further affect your available Abilities, Proficiencies, dialogue options, and how your character interacts with different environments and personalities in the game along with the success rate of their interactions. How you create your character will determine how the game reacts to you. Character Creation is where players can create their own Builds and view details and traits that can define created characters. BG3 CHARACTER CREATION GUIDE BG3 CHARACTER CREATION CLASS TIPS NAVIGATION Click to jump to a specific section of the page About Character Creation ♦ Character Creation Steps ♦ Character Creation Guides & Tips ♦ All Origins ♦ Character Creation Comparison Tables BALDUR'S GATE 3 CHARACTER CREATION WHAT DOES CHARACTER CREATION AFFECT IN BG3 The Character Creation process in Baldur's Gate 3 features a few steps where players can customize each section before proceeding to the next stage. This is more than just aesthetic or appearance preferences. Developers have emphasized how the game reacts to your character based on who they are. Players will not only be creating a character and deciding on how they look, but also defining their identity during this stage which includes the character's history. Baldur's Gate 3 really expands on the different interactive elements of the game, making sure the experiences are unique for each character since the game relies on the narrative of the game. This means you can modify your character and play through the game again with another Character Creation and have a different experience especially now that multiclassing is being implemented. Choosing different Backgrounds will also give players access to unique Quests that wouldn't otherwise be experienced unless they play through each of the available character options. Your choices begin from Character Creation and affect your available interactions which will then further shape the narrative and the trajectory of the story. MULTICLASSING AND CHANGING CLASSES IN BG3 It has been confirmed that Multiclassing is a feature that will be introduced in Baldur's Gate 3. Multiclassing is the ability to switch to another character. Players will now be able to make changes and completely reset their Class in-game after encountering an in-game character without having to restart the game and undergo the Character Creation process again. Players who have played through the Early Acess may find this character familiar and he can be encountered int eh early stages of Act 1. This allows players to then reinvest all their levels without having to put in an extensive amount of extra effort starting from the beginning and no longer have any Ability Score requirements. This encourages players to experiment with multiclassing and gives them more freedom when creating a Build. RESPEC A CHARACTER IN BALDUR'S GATE 3 In Baldur's Gate 3, you will be able to Respec your characters as many times as you want, as long as they you the required gold and have already added Withers to the Camp. Approach to him and select Respec among the services he provides. Withers will ask for 100 gold pieces for his service. The price of the service DOES NOT increase during the course of the game, nor if you use it frequently. Any character can interact with Withers to Respec, even your Companions, if they pay the asking price. Note that respecing a character does not change its interactions or Quests. WHY WAS CHARACTER CUSTOMIZATION LAYOUT CHANGED FROM EARLY ACCESS? A look into the Character Creation page quickly shows the notable difference from the initial Character Creation menus seen on Baldur's Gate 3 Early Access. This was newly organized to clearly present all needed information about the selections of each step in the creation. This layout makes the early game process more inclusive to players new to the Dungeons & Dragon games so that they get a better idea of what choices made during these initial steps could impact later on in the game. Big games like Baldur's Gate 3 will contain a lot of information for new players to process and the developers were looking to capture a wider audience so this layout breaks it down a little easier in a step-by-step process to welcome and encourage new players to play the game and be immersed from the start of the game. ITEMIZATION AND BUILDS IN BG3 Players who wish to go through the first playthrough blind of without guides might not need to note the items in game since they will learn about them as they are encountered, but those who wish to thoroughly plan out their Build can now refer to all available Items, Weapons, and Armor to see how they are obtained or for which Class, Races or Background would best suit any items you would want to use. View all Items, Weapons and Armor on their respective page, how to get them, and if they have any requirements then, you can focus your Build on that. However, as you progress through the game and gain better items, your Build can evolve along with your items especially with the implemented Multiclassing feature and the ability to Respecc. WHO DO YOU DREAM OF? WHO ATTRACTS YOU? After your character is created, you will have a chance to choose Who do you dream of? Who attracts you? This choice does not limit your romance options in-game. However, while camping at night, you will have dreams featuring this mysterious entity. NEW CHARACTER CUSTOMIZATION DETAILS IN BG3 Baldur's Gate 3 offers a new in-depth Character Creation and Customization system to give players the ability to express how they want to portray their characters and make their imaginations a reality, which is an important aspect in all Dungeons & Dragon games. This gives players additional customization options that adjust according to the chosen Race. After choosing the desired race, players can customize unique features found on the character such as Horns and Tails, which are not found on all characters. This also introduces the two new Races in the game, Half-Orc and Dragonborn-- which each display unique characteristics, attachments, and appearances that can be customized. This expands the appearance possibilities and allows for more freedom expression when creating unique looks for each character. EXPANDED CHARACTER CREATION TOOLBOX IN BG3 Your character's identity is the core of the game and your interactions in the game revolve around who you have created, which is why it was important to pay such attention to details to the character-creating process at the start of the game. The creation of your character is part of the experience and your choices during this stage will further impact your experiences and choices as you play. It is important that players had a lot of room for expression during this stage to match the desired appearances with each character's identity. The Character Creation appearances menu includes a large palette of colors and customizability from the hair, eyes, and skin and additional details specific to certain races like horns, tails and jaw structure. Additional details were also given attention, allowing players to not only add specific minor details but also adjust the intensity of them. This includes being able to adjust the maturity and the intensity of the freckles on the character if any. During the showcase, viewers also witness the customization process and a rundown of the different menu options. Viewers noticed an option to customize the character's genitalia and the ability to toggle 'Hide Clothes' to see the effects of the changes. Developers did not pinpoint the feature, but it was seen on the appearance customization menu. All in all, this displays the great lengths and extensiveness of the customization abilities in the game, taking into account different conditions for inclusivity and variety such as Vitiligo and Heterochromia. INTRODUCING DRAGONBORN AND HALF-ORC TO BALDUR'S GATE 3 The developers were happy to announce the introduction of a few new Races to the Baldur's Gate roster. Players can play as Half-Orc and Dragonborn characters if they want to elevate their fantasy experience. Developers paid special attention to details when creating and designing the Dragonborn, which was the most technically challenging since they are the most diverse and furthest from the other humanoid races. Developers had to consider the different ways the details of the Dragonborn can vary and how their scales react to the lighting. They've expressed giving the lighter shades and white colours additional attention by adding a pearlescent finish. BALDUR'S GATE 3 STEP-BY-STEP CHARACTER CREATION PROCESS ORIGINS ORIGINS IN BALDUR'S GATE 3 CHARACTER CREATION Origins are like pre-made Characters that can be selected during Character Creation if players do not wish to undergo specific Customization options. Each Origin character will have different backgrounds and Classes that will also affect gameplay and interactions. Players who want to be a part of each step of the customization can opt for a Custom character while on this menu. Players who choose not to go with an Origin character may have a chance to engage with them as Companions except for The Dark Urge. ASTARION Rogue - High Elf - Noble LAE'ZEL Githyanki - Fighter - Soldier GALE Human - Wizard - Sage SHADOWHEART High Half-Elf - Cleric - Trickery Domain - Urchin WYLL Human - Warlock - The Fiend KARLACH Asmodeus Tiefling - Barbarian THE DARK URGE APPEARANCES GENERAL CUSTOMIZATION OPTIONS IN BALDURS GATE 3 Players can toggle and modify a variety of individual features for their character. These customization options may vary depending on your character selection choices and character Race. Players can also opt to randomize their features and modify them from there. Body Type: Players will have four body types to choose from that will modify the physical build of the character Identity: Choose between Male, Female, and Non-Binary/Other. Voice: Play through a few voice-acting options for your character Face: There will be a total of 8 premade facial feature combinations to choose from Skin Colour: Browse through the different skin tones to change the pigment of the character's skin Scarring: There will be a few pre-made facial markings for players to choose from Genitals: Players can modify the character's genitals. Toggle 'Hide Clothes' to see the changes Crest: Choose from different Crest designs (specific to Dragonborn) Chins: Choose from different Chin designs (specific to Dragonborn) Jaws: Choose from different Jaw designs (specific to Dragonborn) FURTHER CUSTOMIZATION: The following customization options are edited with a slider to determine how intense or how much of the following features players would like to see on their character. Maturity Freckle Quantity Freck Intensity Vitiligo Pigmentation OTHER CUSTOMIZATION OPTIONS Aside from the general customization options players can also choose to further modify other specific features on their character. Each section will have a dedicated menu for customizing each part and feature. The available menu options may change depending on your Race choice, for example, Dragonborn characters will have an added Tail customization option menu while Tiefling characters have horns that can also be customized. Body Art: Body Art includes adding Tattoos -- Choose from a variety of Style options, then modify the colour-- as well as piercing styles. Eyes: Modify the colour of your character's eyes and be able to toggle Heterochromia from this menu, which allows players to select two different eye colours, one for each eye. Makeup Hair: Players will be able to switch out the character's Hairstyle and modify the Hair Colour, Highlights, and Greying of the hair. Each customizable option will display colour palette players can choose from and modify the colours of the highlights and