IGN Logo Skip to content Super Mario RPG Guide START TRACKING PROGRESS Create a free account or Log in. Find in guide Checklists Game Info WALKTHROUGH Walkthrough Prologue - Bowser's Keep 1st Star Piece - Mushroom Kingdom Region Walkthrough 2nd Star Piece - Tadpole Pond and Forest Maze Walkthrough 3rd Star Piece - Moleville Mountain Walkthrough 4th Star Piece - Booster Tower and Star Hill Walkthrough 5th Star Piece - Sunken Ship and Land's End Walkthrough 6th Star Piece - Nimbus Land and Barrel Volcano Walkthrough 7th Star Piece - Bowser's Keep and Weapon World Walkthrough Postgame Boss Guide Join for free or log in Super Mario RPG Guide Guide Checklists Walkthrough BY BRENDAN GRAEBER, RONNY BARRIER, MARK MEDINA, +57 MORE UPDATED NOV 29, 2023 IGN's Walkthrough for Super Mario RPG Remake will guide you through the Mushroom Kingdom and beyond, featuring in-depth walkthrough for every main region and where to find one of the seven Star Pieces. In Super Mario RPG, Mario will team up with friends new and old to fight against a mysterious new Smithy Gang that threatens the Mushroom Kingdom, and the dreams of everyone across the land. As you progress through the story, you'll add new characters to your party and fight formidable opponents in turn-based battles, while exploring wild new areas, shopping in towns, and facing off against powerful bosses. Super Mario RPG - Complete Postgame Boss Guide 14:21 Autoplay setting: On Super Mario RPG - Complete Postgame Boss Guide This walkthrough is divided up into chapters based around finding each of the Seven Star Pieces, mainly centering around one region of the map at a time. Select a chapter below to get guides for each section, including tips on fighting new enemies you'll encounter, where to find Hidden Treasures, how to solve a variety of puzzles, boss strategies, and more! ADVERTISEMENT Super Mario RPG Walkthrough Sections Prologue - Bowser's Keep 1st Star Piece - Mushroom Kingdom Region Walkthrough 2nd Star Piece - Tadpole Pond and Forest Maze Walkthrough 3rd Star Piece - Moleville Mountain Walkthrough 4th Star Piece - Booster Tower and Star Hill Walkthrough 5th Star Piece - Sunken Ship and Land's End Walkthrough 6th Star Piece - Nimbus Land and Barrel Volcano Walkthrough 7th Star Piece - Bowser's Keep and Weapon World Walkthrough Post Game Bosses After you've completed Super Mario RPG Remake on Nintendo Switch, you'll be able to save a Clear File that unlocks new endgame bosses that are much harder versions of bosses you've fought across the story. These bosses should only be attempted once you have the best weapons and armor, and leveled up past 25 and beyond. See a list below for tips and strategies to defeat them: Scratchy-Throat Belome Leveled-Up Punchinello Engine 023 Booster Extra-Fancy Bundt Duel-Ready Johnny Mario-Style Jinx Culex 3D Up Next: Prologue - Bowser's Keep Previous SUPER MARIO RPG GUIDE Next PROLOGUE - BOWSER'S KEEP Top Guide Sections Walkthrough Super Mario RPG Remake New Features and Differences Boss Fights Essential Tips and Tricks Was this guide helpful? Leave feedback In This Guide Super Mario RPG ARTEPIAZZA NOV 17, 2023 ESRB: Everyone Nintendo Switch Rate this game RELATED GUIDES Overview Walkthrough Super Mario RPG Remake New Features and Differences Boss Fights Conversation1 Comment Have fun. Don't be mean. Feel free to criticize ideas, not people. Report bad behavior. Read our community guidelines. Sort by Best ShadowHarvester 29 November, 2023 Now this is a perfect walkthrough of this game. Straight to the point, and very organized. I'll gladly use this guide for any current, and future playthrough I do. Reply Share Powered by TermsPrivacyFeedback Popular in the Community AdChoices Sponsored Sony Reportedly Pauses PlayStation VR2 Production to Clear Backlog of Unsold Units - IGN CaptainDunbrody Well done Sony, I got it not long after launch.Seeing how well it was supported I think I will be skipping on next-gen Sony console altogether. Top Comment 2 America's Founding Fathers on Film and TV, From Hamilton to Franklin - IGN Jboner Our founding fathers would be ashamed amd embarrassed by the current state of the country. That their beautiful and amazing constitution is constantly attacked, questioned and fought is sad. They were brilliant to have formed such an amazing union and put forth a legislative body that is the crown for fair governing and allowing it citizens actual freedom. It is truly sad to see the treasonous attitudes toward our formation of a country and its current state and future. Top Comment 8 Drake Bell Details 'Extensive' Sexual Abuse by Childhood Dialogue Coach, Nickelodeon Issues Statement - IGN zaihed19 Only 16 months in prison?? Even 16 years would be too short of a sentence. While I don’t condone the stuff Drake did with that minor a few years back I do sympathize with what he went through. Nobody, absolutely nobody should be sexually abused or assaulted. Top Comment 30 10 Movies Like Inception That Will Bend Your Mind - IGN SpicyMichael Off the top of my head, I'd nominate eXistenZ (1999), A Clockwork Orange (1971), Dark City (1998), Waking Life (2001), and Fallen (1998). Top Comment 4 An Ode To The Fictional Women the Streaming Era Killed - IGN maddogtannen316 "at least 120 shows were cancelled across streaming, but i'll single these out to shape my narrative for women's month." i always held out hope that ign wouldnt turn into polygon/kotaku. it's just disappointing Top Comment 38 Reviews•Best Picks•How to Romance Tifa in FF7 Rebirth•News•GTA 5 Cheats•IGN Store•HowLongToBeat•Deals•Contact Us•Guides•IGN YouTube•IGN TikTok•IGN Twitter•Map Genie IGN supports Group Black and its mission to increase greater diversity in media voices and media ownership. Group Black's collective includes Cxmmunity, Black Women Talk Tech and AFROPUNK