Subscribe Pop Culture Sports Style Music Collectibles Gaming Web3 GAMING The 26 Best Video Game Protagonists, Ranked Nintendo / Square Enix Europe / ONE37pm By: Elton Jones Published Jan 17, 2024 Whenever you set off on an adventure within a new digital world in gaming, you take command of a sole individual who's set up as your heroic avatar within it. Since the dawn of gaming, certain video game characters have risen to iconic status thanks to their world-saving exploits, recognizable voices, and unmistakable appearances. This list of the best video game protagonists features the type of characters that past and present (and hopefully future!) generations of gamers have become quite enamored with. Here's our ranking of the video game heroes and heroines that are the greatest of all time. RELATED: The 50 Most Iconic Video Games Characters of All Time 26. Sonic the Hedgehog Sega 'Sonic the Hedgehog' series First Appearance: Rad Mobile (1990) Let's kick off this list of the best video game protagonists by acknowledging Sega's answer to Nintendo's dominant mustachioed mascot. When Sonic the Hedgehog sped onto the scene, he accumulated the types of gamers that wanted someone faster, leaner, and arguably cooler to invest in. Since his introduction in 1991, Sonic has saved the world from peril by defeating the evil Doctor Eggman every chance he gets. And whenever he goes "Super Sonic" mode, everyone's excitement hits an even higher level at the epic boss fights to come. 25. Mario Nintendo 'Donkey Kong' and 'Super Mario' series First Appearance: Donkey Kong (1981) Sonic may be one of the GOATs that 90s gamers remember fondly. But his rival is considered more of a pioneer because his game and the console it released on practically saved the video game industry in the early 80s. Before that, Mario hopped and bopped all over the place in the original Donkey Kong arcade game to save sweet old Pauline. And ever since then, Mario has been the undisputed savior of the "Mushroom Kingdom" countless times as he's been Princess Peach's savior and Bowser's archnemesis. 24. 2B Square Enix 'NieR:Automata' First Appearance: Nier:Automata (2007) YoRHa No.2 Type B (Battle) sounds super badass...but we prefer calling her 2B since it rolls off the younger a bit easier. Thanks to the shocking critical and financial success of Nier: Automata, this deadly combat android has become one of the more recognizable female protagonists in all of gaming. Her gracefulness goes hand in hand with her ruthlessness, which is constantly on display in battle. Her demanding personality and overall design inspired by haute couture also afford her a few more points on the "cool as hell video game character" scale. 23. Aloy Sony Interactive Entertainment 'Horizon' series First Appearance: Horizon Zero Dawn (2017) The Horizon series puts the proud and powerful hunter Aloy front and center. Her journeys across post-apocalyptic America have helped develop her into a confident individual who knows how to make her way around all the mechanical beasts that endanger her well-being. She exudes the type of character traits that made people fall in love with movie icons such as Sarah Connor from The Terminator and Ellen Ripley from Alien. Aloy's one of those battle-hardened ladies you always cheer for whenever she comes across something far bigger than she is. 22. Bayonetta Nintendo 'Bayonetta' series First Appearance: Bayonetta (2009) The "Umbra Witch" that keeps pistols on her feet and hellish demons on speed dial is such a joy to watch in action. Bayonetta exudes sex appeal, is extremely cocky every time she's confronted by her foes, and has access to a wealth of weapons and monsters that make her a powerhouse princess. The fact that she goes into a quick dance number every time she needs to summon one of her beasties is so damn cool. Bayonetta has to make this list of the best video game protagonists due to all those aforementioned awesome factors we love about her. 21. Marcus Fenix Xbox Game Studios 'Gears of War' series First Appearance: Gears of War (2006) The rough and rugged Marcus Fenix made his way out of that prison cell during the first Gears of War into some bulky COG armor to take the fight to the "Locust Horde." For the series' first three mainline games, Fenix's undying sense of courage and leadership have turned him into a fan favorite amongst gamers. His look is badass, his voice is unmistakable, and his expert use of the "Lancer" assault rifle & the chainsaw attached to it presents him as one of the most resilient video game protagonists of all time. 20. Gordon Freeman Valve 'Half-Life' series First Appearance: Half-Life (1998) Gordon Freeman has and will probably never utter a single word. But for some reason, his role as the silent protagonist for the Half-Life series has afforded him a ton of fame and adulation from everyone who's taken control of him. Gaming's most beloved theoretical physicist has a mean crowbar swing and is quite adept at cutting down hideous monsters with his trusty "Gravity Gun." His overall design presents him as a very simple man who's capable of performing extraordinary tasks, such as saving the human race from an invading force comprised of vicious aliens. 19. Max Payne Rockstar Games 'Max Payne' series First Appearance: Max Payne (2001) This man has been through hell and back. From his bullet-riddled stay in the big city to his explosive pitstop in Brazil, Max Payne has been forced to deal with his inner demons and a whole host of folks who want him dead along the way. Fans have become enamored with this sad soul and have followed him on his road to redemption in three different games. Pulling off the slickest of kills in bullet-time slow-motion mode with Mr. Payne will never get old. 18. Leon S. Kennedy Capcom 'Resident Evil' series First Appearance: Resident Evil 2 (1998) Leon S. Kennedy is one of those types of guys who's been through the wringer but has managed to keep his composure and save the day at all costs. Resident Evil 2 saw him enter the series as a young Racoon City Police Department upstart who held his own against a horde of bioweapons. And since that life-changing ordeal, Leon has become a fan favorite of many due to his quick maturation, dedication to seeing all his missions through, and nasty footwork when it comes to roundhouse kicking infected villagers. 17. Ezio Auditore da Firenze Ubisoft 'Assassin's Creed' series First Appearance: Assassin's Creed II (2009) In our and many other Assassin's Creed fans' eyes, Ezio Auditore da Firenze will always be recognized as the poster boy for Ubisoft's long-running franchise. He commanded everyone's attention from the very start of Assassin's Creed II, then went on to become one of the strongest leaders in the Assassin Brotherhood over time across Assassin's Creed: Brotherhood and Assassin's Creed: Revelations. Ezio's quick wit, masterful espionage skillset, and iconic look are what make him stand side by side with the best video game protagonists on this list. 16. John Marston Rockstar Games 'Red Dead Redemption' First Appearance: Red Dead Redemption (2010) Both Red Dead Redemption games have done a sublime job when it comes to detailing the rise and fall of one of the best cowboys in gaming, John Marston. The second game (which serves as a prequel to the first) shows how he became a crucial member of Dutch van der Linde's gang, while the first game follows his solo journey as a bounty hunter sent in to eliminate his former cohorts. His gruff demeanor and continued search for redemption showed him in a light that makes him easy to appreciate. His last stand truly stays with us and gamers alike as one of the saddest moments in gaming. 15. Dante Capcom 'Devil May Cry' series First Appearance: Devil May Cry (2001) He's a silver-tongued, gun-wielding, sword-swinging half-human, half-demon hero. And his name is Dante, who's recognized by Capcom diehards as one of the coolest characters in gaming. The main protagonist for the Devil May Cry series makes taking down all sorts of hellish creatures look so easy. Besides all the action-packed sequences he's always caught in, Dante delivers plenty of hilarity in the most expected and unexpected ways. The Son of Sparda is royalty when it comes to the best video game protagonists hailings from action games. 14. BJ Blazkowicz Bethesda Softworks 'Wolfenstein' series First Appearance: Wolfenstein 3D (1992) BJ Blazkowicz loves killing Nazis. The way he eliminates them in the most gruesome manner possible has been amazing to watch and play out on our own since 1992. The square-jawed badass who also goes by the nickname of "Terror Billy" made an incredible comeback in Wolfenstein: The New Order, which afforded him more character attributes that made him even more of a likable war hero. That raspy voice of his adds a few more points to his overall cool factor, by the way. 13. Doomguy/Doom Slayer Bethesda Softworks 'DOOM' series First Appearance: DOOM (1993) Since 1993, DOOM's demon-busting soldier, Earth's biggest defender, has been the epitome of supreme perseverance. Doomguy hit the scene and became the face of first-person shooters, then he got the makeover of a lifetime once he made his grand return as the highly intimidating Doom Slayer. The man becomes even more of a legend as he's backed by some hardcore metal tunes while he's in the middle of tearing apart a whole swath of demons with his "BFG" and trusty chainsaw in hand. 12. Ellie Sony Interactive Entertainment 'The Last of Us' series First Appearance: The Last of Us (2013) Yeah we know, we know...Joel's starring role in the first part of The Last of Us solidified him as one of Sony PlayStation's most revered characters. But his world-altering decision that transpired at the end of his journey makes his selfishness that much more prevalent. As for Ellie, she gets the nod over her makeshift father on this list of the best video game protagonists. Her growth makes her immensely likable - she kept Joel alive while she was forced to fend off a colony of cannibals, then she embarked on a difficult road to revenge that had us cheering her on the entire way. Ellie's survival instincts and dedication to her loved ones make her a remarkable gaming protagonist. 11. Samus Aran Nintendo 'Metroid' series First Appearance: Metroid (1986) Minds were blown worldwide once young impressionable gamers reached the end of the very first Metroid on NES. The spacesuit-wearing hero of that game took off her suit to reveal that she actually must be referred to as a heroine. Ever since then, Samus Aran has emerged as one of Nintendo's greatest characters thanks to her calm and confident demeanor - even in the face of constant threats coming from bloodthirsty aliens, she remains cool under pressure and blasts them to Kingdom Come on the regular. We'll never get tired of Samus Aran bringing the fight to Ridley and all the other aliens that try to test her. 10. Link Nintendo 'The Legend of Zelda' series First Appearance: The Legend of Zelda (1986) Speaking of GOATED Nintendo mascots, we gotta speak on the green-tunic-wearing, Master Sword-swinging, and Hyrule-saving icon named Link. The Legend of Zelda series has made sure to present its protagonist as one of the boldest heroes in all of gaming. Link has taken the fight to Ganondorf on countless occasions. And all the while, he's survived some insanely dangerous encounters with a dark doppelganger, a world-ending omen in the form of a scary-looking moon, alternate universes, etc. Link saves the world every chance he gets with his iconic Master Sword and Hylian Shield in hand. 9. Master Chief Xbox Game Studios 'Halo' series First Appearance: Halo: Combat Evolved (2001) "I Need A Weapon." "Wake Me…When You Need Me." "Sir, Finishing This Fight." Those fire quotables come from none other than the greatest Spartan of them all, Master Chief. There's such an air of mystery surrounding his true origin and what he even looks like. That main attribute about him and the fact that he's a one-man army that gives hell to the Covenant on the regular are why he's on this list of the best video game protagonists. Halo is Master Chief