Reviews / Why join our community? For companies Frequently asked questions Contact UX Courses Master Classes Community Literature Blog Log in Join our community A Game Explained (an example of a single game and how it meets the rules of fun) by Janaki Mythily Kumar , Mario Herger and Rikke Friis Dam | 1 year ago | 8 min read 829 shares Share this article Cite this article Fun is the key to how games work, and it’s the key to making gamification work, too. Without fun, gamification is simply another feature of a system or product – with fun, your product or system becomes much more enjoyable to use. There are several criteria which need to be met in order for a game to be considered fun. Namely, it must have goals (so the player has something to achieve) and rules (so that the player has a means to achieve those goals); it must also provide feedback (so that the players can examine their progress or lack of it), and it must involve voluntary play (because being forced to have fun isn’t fun). Last but not least, there must be obstacles to provide a challenge. Here, we’ll be looking at how the computer game classic, Tetris, meets these criteria for fun. Table of contents Tetris Goals Rules Feedback Voluntary Play Obstacles The Take Away References & Where to Learn More Tetris Tetris is a surprising game. On paper, at least, it seems unlikely that something so basic should have done so well beyond the year 1975. Nevertheless, it’s been a consistently popular video game for decades. It was invented in Russia, and it was never expected to be as popular as it became. Yet, the reason it is so popular is that it meets the key criteria for fun in a game. That is, it has goals, rules, feedback, participation is voluntary, and there are unnecessary obstacles that keep the game challenging. Goals The aim in Tetris is simple; you bring down blocks from the top of the screen. You can move the blocks around, either left to right and/or you can rotate them. The blocks fall at a certain rate, but you can make them fall faster if you’re sure of your positioning. Your objective is to get all the blocks to fill all the empty space in a line at the bottom of the screen; whenever you do this, you’ll find that the blocks vanish and you get awarded some points. A goal gives us a reason to play the game. Tetris offers an incredibly simple reason to play—pitting your wits against the computerized block dropper in order to last as long as you can. Rules Tetris has very simple rules: you can only move the pieces in specific ways; your game is over if your pieces reach the top of the screen; and you can only remove pieces from the screen by filling all the blank space in a line. Rules give much needed structure to our play. A completely random environment offers no clue as to how to play and would be incredibly frustrating. How fortunate it is, then, that Tetris’s three rules are what shape it into such an award-winning game. You have probably seen Tetris (or even played it), but, just in case—this is what Tetris looks like. © @joefoodie, CC BY 2.0 Feedback Each time you clear a line in Tetris, you are awarded more points. Each time your pieces reach the top of the screen, your game is over. That means, if you’re not particularly attentive, your game can be over very quickly. Feedback in Tetris is instant and incontrovertible. You always know how well you are performing as you play the game. We like feedback, and this enables us to feel satisfied/dissatisfied with our performance. It’s a measure of the fun we’re having, and it constantly challenges us to do better. Also, the increasing speeds involved in playing the game generate a fair deal of endorphins and dopamine. If you’re thinking that a good indicator of a game’s worth is how hard you go “Argh!” when you eventually lose, then you’re on the right track here. Voluntary Play We’ve yet to find anyone who has been coerced into playing Tetris. If we could play Tetris all day rather than work… we probably would for a few weeks. Yet, sadly, we’ve never found anyone willing to pay us to play Tetris. Presumably, in the beginning, a lucky select few were paid to play it for testing purposes. Still, it’s not work; it’s fun, and we choose to play Tetris (or to do something else). Obstacles Tetris has a cunning means of adding challenge. It becomes faster the better you do. This means you have to make the same decisions but under a higher level of pressure. There’s no end in Tetris if you could think and move your fingers fast enough – you could literally play forever. However, this is the real genius of Tetris – we play it because it keeps us in a state of “flow”; that is, it balances our skills with the challenge in hand. We’ll never “finish” the game, but we are constantly compelled to come back again and try to do a little bit better. Take the highest level you’ve reached and remember the fast, furious gameplay involved. Yes, we’re talking endorphins again… and going “Grr” when a piece lands badly… and perhaps shouting at anyone who dares to distract us in these tension-laced-but-addictively-fun moments. When the author used to play Tetris a lot, his friends and he would compare high scores on a near-daily basis to see who was “the best”. It didn’t matter who was in the lead, at least, not really… but somehow it did at the same time. All that came from arranging falling blocks—coloured, simple, almost childish-looking structures made up of little squares—at speed on a screen the size of your palm. Tetris meets all of the four criteria for having fun and the obstacles offer that fun longevity—far greater longevity than Tetris’ Russian inventor ever anticipated. Of course, Tetris has left plenty of folks frustrated over the years, too: “If Tetris has taught me anything, it’s that errors pile up and accomplishments disappear.” — Damana Madden, Web application builder and gamer Interestingly, Dr. Tom Stafford, of the Department of Psychology at the University of Sheffield, pointed out that the game taps into the mind’s simple pleasure of tidying up things by feeding it with a “world of uncompleted tasks”. Then, we have the Tetris Effect, a scientifically recognised phenomenon that relates to how people find themselves thinking about how shapes in the real world can fit together. Not for nothing has Tetris made so deep an impression in the popular psyche: all this from a—for lack of a better term—somewhat backward-looking game devised in the Soviet Union of the 1980s. The Take Away Tetris meets all of the rules required to have fun. It provides an objective (make as many rows as possible), rules (you can only rotate blocks into certain positions, lines disappear only when fully complete, and, should any block fall to make it high enough to touch the top of the screen—the game is over), feedback (a constantly updated score), and play is purely voluntary. We would do a disservice to the analysis if we failed to mention that the last magical ingredient—increasingly hard obstacles, which, in the case of this game, manifest in the ever-increasingly frenetic speeds at which blocks fall. If you are looking for a guide as to what makes a game fun – you can do a lot worse than examine Tetris. References & Where to Learn More Find more about The History of Tetris. Janaki Mythily Kumar and Mario Herger, Gamification at Work: Designing Engaging Business Software, The Interaction Design Foundation, 2014 A fascinating article about the enduring appeal of and winning formula involved in Tetris. Hero Image: © Damian Yerrick and Ondrejk, CC BY-SA 3.0 Web Design for Usability Closes in 0 days 07 hrs 53 mins 21 secs booked View Course Get Weekly Design Insights Join 310,329 designers who get useful UI / UX Design tips from our newsletter. Go TOPICS IN THIS ARTICLE Gamification (GF) 829 shares Share this article Cite this article What You Should Read Next Bartle’s Player Types for Gamification Gamification is not the same as game design, because it adds game-like elements to non-gaming environments. However, the 1k shares 1 year ago Read article A Brief History of Games Human history and games are inextricably intertwined. Irrefutable evidence resounds down through the ages that fun and g 831 shares 2 years ago Read article The Persona Template for Gamification For any gamification project, you’ll need to do research on players in order to determine what they will require from th 699 shares 3 years ago Read article Ideas for Conducting UX Research with Children One of the most challenging realms to conduct user research with is when you have to conduct research with children. The 676 shares 3 years ago Read article Display Achievements to Encourage Website Usage You are doing so great; you’re top of the class! Don’t you just love to hear a compliment like this? We’re all human, an 676 shares 3 years ago Read article Player-Centered Design: Moving Beyond User-Centered Design for Gamification We’ve all come to think in terms of user-centred design over the years. It’s a critical component of UX design, and it h 675 shares 1 year ago Read article The Use of Story and Emotions in Gamification Gamification projects can benefit from storytelling features; these features can help arouse emotional connections with 628 shares 11 mths ago Read article Monitoring Player Motivation for Gamification One of the big questions facing us as gamification designers is, “When will your player get bored of your gamification p 614 shares 11 mths ago Read article Happiness in Gaming Audrey Hepburn, the star of the silver screen, said, “The most important thing is to enjoy your life – to be happy – it’ 567 shares 5 years ago Read article Work in Games Very few people look forward to work. If you weren’t working, you could be doing something fun. Yet, work isn’t the oppo 504 shares 10 mths ago Read article Top Articles The 5 Stages in the Design Thinking Process 1.8k shares What is Design Thinking and Why Is It So Popular? 1.6k shares Personas – A Simple Introduction 1.5k shares Bad Design vs. Good Design: 5 Examples We can Learn From 1.5k shares 10 Great Sites for UI Design Patterns 1.4k shares Top Topics Design Thinking (DT) 49 articles 10 videos User Experience (UX) Design 147 articles 8 videos Graphic Design 19 articles 4 videos Color Theory 6 articles 6 videos User Interface (UI) Design 60 articles 9 videos Open Access—Link to us! We believe in Open Access and the democratization of knowledge. Unfortunately, world-class educational materials such as this page are normally hidden behind paywalls or in expensive textbooks. If you want this to change, cite this article, link to us, or join us to help us democratize design knowledge! With 171,372 graduates, the Interaction Design Foundation is the biggest online design school globally. We were founded in 2002. Connect With Us Reach us at hello@interaction-design.org or through our online contact form. Have questions? Check our frequently asked questions. Get Inspired Weekly Join 310,329 designers and get weekly inspiration and design tips in your inbox. Subscribe Browse UX / UI Design Topics A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z # UX Courses Beginner UX Courses Intermediate UX Courses Advanced UX Courses Community Master Classes Local Groups Discussions Literature UX Daily Articles UX Topics UX Books About About Us The People Behind Contact Us Terms of Use / Privacy For companies What is UX Design? Give as gift Careers Want 8 reasons to join our community? ×