Guest Login | Sign Up Retro News Reviews Features Games Guides Videos Forums eShop Codes Top 50Best GamesNESRetroGuides 50 Best NES Games Of All Time As rated by you by Gavin Lane & Nintendo Life Staff Mon 21st Aug 2023 Share:170 Subscribe to Nintendo Life on YouTube763K Watch on YouTube Remember, this is a dynamic list that's updated in real-time according to each game's User Rating in our database. If you haven't rated the ones you've played, feel free to rate any of the games below and potentially alter the ranking. Enjoy! The Nintendo Entertainment System, or NES (ness? nezz? enn-eee-ess?), is the archetypal home video game console. Sure, earlier machines such as the mighty Atari 2600 pioneered the basic concept of an under-the-TV console with interchangeable software and controller accessories, but the utilitarian design and hardware innovations of Nintendo's 8-bit system set the stage for modern console gaming. Image: Nintendo Life Following the video game 'crash' of 1983, the NES (or Famicom in Japan) defied naysayers and singlehandedly brought the industry back stronger than ever thanks to canny marketing and — more significantly — an excellent software library. In the early days, solid ports of hits like Donkey Kong gave players a taste of the arcade in their homes, and game design innovations (and the introduction of on-cartridge chips) further enhanced and expanded the potential for developers making games on the humble NES. Compare 1983's Donkey Kong port to 1988's Super Mario Bros. 3 and it's hard to believe they're running on the same system. Below you'll find a list of the top 50 NES games ever made. As with many of our other Top 50 system lists, the ranking below is governed by User Ratings submitted by Nintendo Life readers, so this list is not set in stone. The ordering will continue to evolve automatically according to each game's User scores (from 0-10) on the Nintendo Life game database. Disagree with the order? Have your say by scrolling down and rating them now! And if you've rated them already? Thank you kindly — sit back and enjoy. If there's a game bubbling under the top 50 that you'd like to rate, feel free to find it using the search tool below and give it a score out of 10. Otherwise, scroll down and enjoy our round-up of the very best NES games ever... Note. In order for games to become eligible, they need a minimum of 25 User Ratings in total. 50. Battletoads (NES) 7.2 PROFILE Publisher: Tradewest / Developer: Rare Release Date: Jun 1991 (USA) / 18th Feb 1993 (UK/EU) Battletoads had more than a whiff of the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles about it, but with developer Rare at the helm, this side-scrolling beat 'em up had more than enough quality in its art, audio and gameplay to elevate it above the status of 'knock-off'. In fact, despite their high level of difficulty, we'd say the rough 'n' tumble adventures of Rash, Zitz and Pimple are even more fondly remembered than the 8-bit TMNT games. Insanely unfair hoverbike sections aside, there's still plenty of co-op comedy and fun to be found in this series. 49. Wizards & Warriors (NES) 7.2 PROFILE Publisher: Acclaim / Developer: Rare Release Date: Dec 1987 (USA) / 7th Jan 1990 (UK/EU) Rare's 1987 follow-up to its debut NES game Slalom was a 'thou'-filled action-platformer that saw you guiding knight Kuros (the titular warrior) on a quest to defeat Malkil (the titular wizard) and — surprise — rescue a princess from a castle. On the way you collect treasure from chests, deliver steely-bladed justice to all manner of beasties, and leap about the place in an impressively vertical, uncharacteristically forgiving 8-bit adventure. Wizards & Warriors launched in Europe much later, in January 1990, by which time the range of available NES software was much broader, so this arguably got a little lost. Worth digging up, though; it's not one of Rare's all-timers, but it's a decent-looking, underrated little game with the ever-reliable Dave Wise on composing duties. 48. Darkwing Duck (NES) 7.3 PROFILE Publisher: Capcom / Developer: Capcom Release Date: Jun 1992 (USA) / 9th Dec 1993 (UK/EU) Darkwing Duck owes a great deal to Capcom's own Mega Man franchise, borrowing many core elements that make this a solid recommendation for NES fans. Released at the tail end of the console's lifespan, this is particularly evident in the stunning visuals and high production value. While it may not dethrone the Blue Bomber as the quintessential platform shooter for the NES, Darkwing Duck is nevertheless well worth a look. 47. Zelda II: The Adventure of Link (NES) 7.3 REVIEW 8/10 PROFILE Publisher: Nintendo / Developer: Nintendo EAD Release Date: 1st Dec 1988 (USA) / 26th Sep 1988 (UK/EU) Available On: Nintendo Switch Online A radical departure from the template of the first game, Zelda II has enjoyed something of a reappraisal in recent post-Dark Souls years. It's an inscrutable game and one with which we wouldn't feel bad in the slightest using the rewind function if you were playing via Nintendo Switch Online, or save states elsewhere, but it's worth persevering with. In a series that, in the past, risked turning into a by-the-numbers adventure by slavishly sticking to a formula, this first sequel was anything but a repetition — a deeper combat system with RPG levelling elements and side-on platforming villages and dungeons made this a very different experience from the original. You could argue that too much of its sense of adventure and 'wonder' is lost to frustration, but no more so than in other challenging 8-bit games. If you've bounced off The Adventure of Link in the past, we'd urge you to give it another go. 46. Adventure Island II (NES) 7.4 REVIEW 8/10 PROFILE Publisher: Hudson / Developer: Hudson Release Date: Feb 1991 (USA) / 22nd Jul 1992 (UK/EU) Adventure Island II is quite similar to its predecessor in many ways, but with its slightly better control and handful of gameplay additions, it's just that little bit more entertaining. It's also a lot more accessible due to the reserve item system and the shorter stages, compared to the rather brutal original game. 45. Double Dragon II: The Revenge (NES) 7.4 REVIEW 6/10 PROFILE Publisher: Aksys Games / Developer: Technōs Japan Release Date: 15th Jan 1990 (USA) / 1990 (UK/EU) Available On: Nintendo Switch Online This beat 'em up sequel came complete with the all-important two-player component missing from the first game on NES, and while Bimmy and Jimmy's brawling is unlikely to stick with you for long, the ability to get a friend involved in the fight makes Double Dragon II: The Revenge the pick of the pair. 44. Adventure Island III (NES) 7.4 PROFILE Publisher: Hudson / Developer: Hudson Release Date: 18th Sep 1992 (USA) This entry went unreleased in Europe, but it's business as usual with this Adventure Island sequel. Hudson turned in another very solid, colourful, and varied platformer with some minor tweaks and advancements to the previous entry — hey, Master Higgins can now duck! A welcome addition, but hardly a transformative one. Still, Adventure Island III is a great 8-bit time. A great-bit time! Oof, we're banking that one. 43. Faxanadu (NES) 7.4 REVIEW 8/10 PROFILE Publisher: Hudson / Developer: Hudson Release Date: Aug 1989 (USA) / 28th Dec 1990 (UK/EU) No, not that '70s film with Sean Connery in a red mankini (that's Zardoz). Faxanadu is a spin-off of Nihon Falcom's Dragon Slayer series and the title melds the words 'Famicom' and 'Xanadu' (that's Dragon Slayer II) into the sort of fun portmanteau we love to say out loud. Fortunately, the game itself is a thoroughly enjoyable 2D action-RPG and something of an underappreciated gem in the NES library, so we often have cause to speak its name. Developed by Hudson Soft under licence from Falcom, other medieval-feeling side-scrollers might grab all the attention, but Faxanadu is quietly one of the console's best games. 42. Duck Hunt (NES) 7.4 REVIEW 8/10 PROFILE Publisher: Nintendo / Developer: Nintendo R&D1 Release Date: 18th Oct 1985 (USA) / 15th Aug 1987 (UK/EU) A cheeky light gun shooter brimming with personality, many players experienced this as it came bundled with their NES and Zapper (on a dual cart with Super Mario Bros., no less — not a bad deal at all). Duck Hunt offers simple, wholesome light gun fun for the whole family; that is, as long as the wanton murder of countless digital waterfowl while a sniggering bloodhound watches doesn't put you off. An official Wii U Virtual Console release in 2014 reworked the game to function on modern non-CRT televisions with a Wii Remote and an on-screen cursor. As of the end of March 2023, that version is no longer available to buy. 41. Snake Rattle 'n' Roll (NES) 7.4 PROFILE Publisher: Nintendo / Developer: Rare Release Date: Jul 1990 (USA) / 27th Mar 1991 (UK/EU) Available On: Nintendo Switch Online One of the most unique games on the NES, Snake Rattle 'n' Roll's isometric puzzle platforming is a delight to play even now. The balance of eating enemies to get bigger while avoiding bombs and navigating levels is addictive, and it's all tied together well with David Wise's excellent soundtrack and bright, colourful visuals for the time. If you're up for a challenge and a good time, you can't do much better than this underappreciated gem from Rare. Page : 1 2 3 4 5 Next » Up Next: Game Boy Best Nintendo Games By System Game Boy Share:170 17 238 About Gavin Lane Gavin first wrote for Nintendo Life in 2018 before joining the site full-time the following year, rising through the ranks to become Editor. He can currently be found running from a Switch backlog the size of Normandy. Author Profile Twitter/X Reply Comments 238 1 TheFullAndyFri 2nd Apr 2021 The Tiny Toons NES game was great, as was TMNT2. 11 2 Toy_LinkFri 2nd Apr 2021 So does this mean Eliminator Boat Duel is better than Ducktales according to this list? lol 7 3 MagicianFri 2nd Apr 2021 Meh, I saw Pro Wrestling at #47 and checked out. I wouldn't put that game in my top 200. 16 4 johnvboyFri 2nd Apr 2021 I was very late to the party with the NES, I was not that much interested in video games back then, this console just looked great with the robot on T.V. I got bought the console by my mum and had Teenage turtles. Batman, and Metal gear for it, got the bug right there and then, and remember going in to my local newsagents, they used to get a lot of U.S imported magazines, I picked up a copy of Gamepro with Sonic the hedgehog on the cover, so I had bought an 8 bit console when 16 bit had been released. 1 5 ZuljarasFri 2nd Apr 2021 Castlevania 3 Dracula's Curse NOT on the list? How about you delete this list and pretend it never existed? 16 6 PavilFri 2nd Apr 2021 Dr. Mario in the top 10? Can't tell if serious. Also, Adventures of Lolo should be within the top 25. Several other games on this list have me wondering what type of criteria people use to judge "old" games these days. 7 7 HofnarrFri 2nd Apr 2021 I'm missing Duck Tales, Duck Tales2 or Little Nemo. Those were gems... 12 8 MasterGraveheartFri 2nd Apr 2021 I'm sorry, Nintendo Life fans, but no Castlevania II or III, no Contra games, no MEGA MAN 3, no Mega Man 4-6, no Faxanadu, no Earthbound Beginnings, no Sweet Home, no Batman, none of the TMNTs, no DuckTales, no Chip 'n' Dale, no Snow Bros., no Battletoads, no Strider, none of them?!?! 18 9 Grail_QuestFri 2nd Apr 2021 Sorry, but any top 50 list of NES games that leaves out Faxanadu is critically flawed. Faxanadu needs to be on this list. 5 10 LavaTwilightFri 2nd Apr 2021 @dartmonkey Where's Faxanadu? We've rated it as a 7.3 but it's been left out entirely. 6 11 ZuljarasFri 2nd Apr 2021 @LavaTwilight yes it is actually one of the best games ever created! 1 12 HolyGeez03Fri 2nd Apr 2021 Ninja Gaiden II >>> Ninja Gaiden 5 13 luxoriciousFri 2nd Apr 2021 But where