IGN Logo Skip to content Cyberpunk 2077 Guide START TRACKING PROGRESS Create a free account or Log in. Find in guide Interactive Map WALKTHROUGH - MAIN JOBS Walkthrough - Main Jobs Prologue Act 1 Act 2 Act 3 Epilogue How to Unlock All Endings in Cyberpunk 2077 All Ending Rewards For Completing Cyberpunk 2077 How Many Endings Are There In Cyberpunk 2077 Join for free or log in Cyberpunk 2077 Guide Guide Maps How to Unlock All Endings in Cyberpunk 2077 BY ADAM HADAD, ANGIE HARVEY, HANNAH HOOLIHAN, +117 MORE UPDATED JAN 28, 2024 This page is part of IGN's Cyberpunk 2077 Wiki guide and details everything you need to know about unlocking all possible Cyberpunk endings. This will include every necessary dialogue option, main job, and major side jobs needed to achieve all five different endings in Cyberpunk 2077. Each section will have detailed descriptions of each ending and additional choice information contained in spoiler-hidden sections in case you just want to know how to unlock them. Cyberpunk 2077: How to Unlock the Secret Ending 8:29 Autoplay setting: On Cyberpunk 2077: How to Unlock the Secret Ending Spoiler Warning As we've already mentioned, MAJOR STORY SPOILERS are detailed below! Stop scrolling if you want to learn about the endings, yourself, first-hand. ADVERTISEMENT Jump to: Everything You Need To Know About Cyberpunk 2077's Ending How Many Endings Are There? Do Life Paths Have Special Endings? How To Beat Cyberpunk 2077 All Ending Rewards Choice: Call Your Romantic Partner or Not Choice: Who to Team Up With to Raid Arasaka Tower Ending 1: Ending 2: Ending 3: Ending 4: Ending 5: Secret Ending - How to Get the Secret Ending How to Get the Phantom Liberty Secret Ending Everything You Need To Know About Cyberpunk 2077's Endings Listed below is everything you need to know about the five different endings in Cyberpunk 2077. How Many Endings Are There? There are five endings in total. Four standard endings and one secret ending. These endings result in the following epilogue possibilities: Epilogue: Where Is My Mind Epilogue: All Along The Watchtower Epilogue: New Dawn Fades ADVERTISEMENT Epilogue: Path of Glory Epilogue: Path of Least Resistance Do Life Paths Have Special Endings? No. Your Life Path may change your experiences along the way but not the overall ending. Cyberpunk 2077 has multiple drastically different endings, all of which diverge from a single point and have different unlock requirements before that point in order to access them. Here are all the endings we’ve found, including what you need to do to reach them and the major choices that occur during them. How To Beat Cyberpunk 2077 First things first, every ending begins at the same “Point of No Return” mission called Nocturne Op55N1. This has the player meet Hanako Arasaka at a restaurant called Embers, and you will be warned before starting this mission that there’s no coming back from it, so we’d recommend saving right beforehand. Additionally, beating the game will create a special save file at this moment that you can then reload, which will also add a few simple bonus items to your inventory, allowing you to pick-up right before it and complete more side content. ADVERTISEMENT All Ending Rewards Where Is My Mind Rewards Johnny's Tank Top Johnny's Aviators All Along The Watchtower Rewards Aldecaldos Rally Bolero Jacket New Dawn Fades Rewards Aldecaldos Rally Bolero Jacket Liberty PRIDE Choice: Call Your Romantic Partner or Not After Misty leaves you to decide, Johnny suggests that you call anyone that wish to say goodbye to. Here, you'll be given the opportunity to call your romantic partner - if you have one! See our Romance Guide for even more information. Depending on your decision, it will have a minor consequence in your Epilogue. While not super impactful on the main ending, the choice will simply be a fun option to play out should you have built a relationship with a particular character. Calling Your Love Interest: Calling your love interest will allow you to say your final goodbye, as you're not certain if you'll see them again. Saying goodbye will also cause the character in question to make an appearance during the Epilogue - this may depend on your ending though! Goodbyes Aren't My Style: Should you choose not to call your love interest or simply don't have one, you'll be on your own during the epilogue. Choice: Who to Team Up With to Raid Arasaka Tower From here, you go to the roof of Misty’s Esoterica and can choose from five possible routes, all of which are dependent on the side jobs that you have completed. Here are each of the endings, how to unlock them, and how they can differ. If you're looking for something specific, click the links below to jump to... Ending 1: Accept Hanako's Offer (Trust Arasaka) Ending 2: Ask for Rogue's Help ADVERTISEMENT Ending 3: Ask Panam for Help Ending 4: Taking Matter into your Own Hands Ending 5: Secret Ending - Don't Fear the Reaper Ending 1: Hanako's Path (Trust Arasaka) Choosing Hanako's Path is the first option that is available without doing any side content at all. To unlock this ending, simply follow the path of Nocturne Op55N1 to meet Hanako at Embers, and then choose to trust her when speaking to her inside the restaurant. If you would like to play out this ending you will need to select the following options when prompted. "Think trusting Arasaka's risky but worth it." "[Take omega-blockers] Yeah. Don't be mad. After a series of final missions, you will eventually reach an epilogue called "Where Is My Mind" where you are given one last significant choice. For a complete walkthrough that follows Hanako's path, click the links below. Last Caress Totalimmortal Where Is My Mind For details on that choice and what happens during this ending, open the spoiler box below: ADVERTISEMENT Where Is My Mind Epilogue Cyberpunk 2077 Walkthrough - Epilogue: Where Is My Mind 37:54 Autoplay setting: On Cyberpunk 2077 Walkthrough - Epilogue: Where Is My Mind SHOW SPOILERS Ending 2: Ask for Rogue's Help Choosing Rogue's Path will require the completion of several Side Jobs. In order to unlock Rogue's ending, you must complete the series of Side Jobs that are centered around Johnny Silverhand BEFORE entering Embers to meet Hanako. You will need to have completed the following Side Jobs: Tapeworm Chippin' In Blistering Love Johnny Silverhand's questline begins with the mission Chippin’ In, which is given to you after speaking to Johnny during a Main Job called Tapeworm. Once done, you can follow Nocturne Op55N1 as usual, but now when you reach the rooftop you will also have the option to let Johnny take control and storm Arasaka with assistance from Rogue. After that, you will be given one final choice later on that drastically alters which of two epilogues you will experience with the options being "Path of Glory" or "New Dawn Fades" For a complete walkthrough that follows Rogue's path, click the links below. For Whom The Bell Tolls Knockin' On Heaven's Door Epilogues: Path of Glory or New Dawn Fades. ADVERTISEMENT If you would like to play out this ending, you will need to select the following options when prompted. "Think you and Rogue should go." "[Take pseudoendotrizine] I am. Do your thing, Johnny. For details on that choice and what happens during this ending, open the spoiler box below: Path of Glory Epilogue SHOW SPOILERS New Dawn Fades Epilogue SHOW SPOILERS Ending 3: Ask Panam for Help Choosing Panam's Path will require the completion of several Side Jobs. In order to unlock Panam's ending, you will need to have completed the Side Jobs that center around the Aldecaldos, BEFORE entering Embers to meet Hanako. You will need to have completed Panam's following Side Jobs: Life During Wartime Riders on the Storm With a Little Help From My Friends Queen of the Highway ADVERTISEMENT Once done, you can follow Nocturne Op55N1 as usual, but now when you reach the rooftop you will also have the option to handle this yourself and call Panam for help. If you would like to play out this ending, you will need to select the following options when prompted. "Gonna ask Panam for help." "[Take omega-blockers] Yep. Gonna do this with the nomads. After that, you will be given one final choice later on that drastically alters which of the two epilogues you will experience. In order to reach the "New Dawn Fades or All Along The Watchtower" epilogues, you will need to have completed the following Main Jobs: We Gotta Live Together Forward To Death Belly Of The Beast For details on that choice and what happens during this ending, open the spoiler box below: All Along The Watchtower Epilogue Cyberpunk 2077 Walkthrough - Epilogue: All Along The Watchtower 24:38 Autoplay setting: On Cyberpunk 2077 Walkthrough - Epilogue: All Along The Watchtower SHOW SPOILERS New Dawn Fades Epilogue Cyberpunk 2077 Walkthrough - Epilogue: New Dawn Fades 31:16 Autoplay setting: On Cyberpunk 2077 Walkthrough - Epilogue: New Dawn Fades ADVERTISEMENT SHOW SPOILERS Ending 4: How to Unlock The Path of Least Resistance (Suicide Ending) Content Warning - This ending contains the use of sensitive topics, such as suicide. Unlike other final ending choices, The Path of Least Resistance is available without the completion of any additional side content. You should be warned that this particular ending is not recommended, as the game will end with one final cutscene and will contain no epilogue. If you are curious and would like to play out this ending you will need to select the following options when prompted. Select any ending option. "Could also put this all to rest." "[Toss pills] I know. Exactly what we're gonna do. To find out how this ending plays out, click the spoiler tag below for more details! Path of Least Resistance Epilogue Cyberpunk 2077 Walkthrough - Epilogue: Path of Least Resistance 6:06 Autoplay setting: On Cyberpunk 2077 Walkthrough - Epilogue: Path of Least Resistance SHOW SPOILERS Ending 5: Secret Ending - (Don't Fear) The Reaper Choosing the Secret Ending will require the completion of a number of Side Jobs and have reached a certain percentage of friendship towards Johnny. ADVERTISEMENT How to Unlock the Don't Fear the Reaper Ending In order to unlock the secret (Don't Fear) The Reaper ending, you must have completed a series of Side Jobs that are centered around Johnny Silverhand BEFORE entering Embers to meet with Hanako. You will need to have completed the following Side Jobs: Tapeworm Chippin' In Blistering Love Along with the following Side Jobs, you will also need to have a relationship with Johnny that's at least over 70%. If that's not the case, you can opt to select the following answers during his major Side Job, Chippin' In. You can find the correct dialogue needed for Chippin' In below. "Let's do something about that." Be sure to inscribe Johnny's initials when prompted. "The Guy who Saved My Life" "Nah, fucked that up too." "What do you want from me?" "OK. But as second chances go, this is your last." "You were a real dick in the beginning." "When you said you let down your friends..." "Yeah, I'll call Rogue." If you're still curious and want more details, you can check out our How to Correctly Respond to Johnny in the Oil Fields guide for even more details. If you would like to play out this ending, you will need to select the following options when prompted. "Think you and Rogue should go." You will now want to wait approximately 5 minutes on this menu, as after some time has past, Johnny will speak up and offer you another solution. "Let's hear this plan." Cyberpunk 2077: How to Unlock the Secret Ending 8:29 Autoplay setting: On Cyberpunk 2077: How to Unlock the Secret Ending SHOW SPOILERS ADVERTISEMENT Ending 6: Phantom Liberty Secret Ending - The Tower The Tower ending is a secret ending that was added to the base game with the addition of the Phantom Liberty expansion. To achieve The Tower ending, you'll need to betray Songbird at the end of Killing Moon by handing her over to Reed (King of Swords) or refusing to kill her at the end