forums Potionomics Walkthrough and Guide Table of Contents Edit Page Create a walkthrough page Welcome to our Potionomics (2022) Walkthrough and guide. We will show you the way to beating each one of the contests at the end of each week. We will also offer a specific guide to help you understand how brewing potions work. Our Achievement guide will show you how to unlocking every single one. We also have some insights on Hero adventures, boosting relationships, resources management, haggling, and customization of your potion shop" Introduction Potionomics combines different aspects such as deck building, for haggling with customers, resource management and crafting, for potion brewing, as well as a little bit of relationship management, to increase your relationship with heroes and vendors to get something out of it, such as reduced prices on their goods. The game will be divided into days, where almost every action you take will spend time slots. 10 days will be a week. At the end of each weak, you will face a competition, where your potions-crafting and haggling skills will be tested. You need to win each one of these competitions to continue. The game might be a little overwhelming at the beginning, a lot of information will be presented, and some things like where to find X ingredients will be hard to know, but we are here to help you, so let's get right to it! Our comment section is always available, whether it be to ask us anything you might be missing or just to give us feedback about the guide, we encourage you to use it so we can keep in touch. Table Of Contents Walkthrough Week 1 to 5 & Required Potions for Contest Guides Potions, Ingredients & Magimins Selling Potions & Haggling Cualdrons & Shelves Deck Builder Gardening Boosting Relationships Time Managment Achievements Last edited by Upitah on Oct 31, 22 9:27am Next Week 1 to 5 & Required Potions for Contest Support this Guide Support our guide writers and staff so we can continue to make the best guides for all of your favourite games. Support us Get Walkthroughs & Guides Alerts in your Mail Click here to add your comment Latest commented pages Week 1 2 Cualdrons & Shelves 1 Gaming Lounge More walkthroughs on Neoseeker Walkthroughs Cheats FAQs Reviews Site mode: Mobile | Desktop Terms Privacy Support Us Contact Us © Neo Era Media served in: 0.0421s