Search Help Tips Dictionary History Forums Contact HomeDictionaryG - Definitions Gamepad Updated: 01/18/2023 by Computer Hope A gamepad, game controller, joypad, or video game controller is a peripheral device designed to connect to a computer or console gaming system. It has multiple buttons and may have one or two mini joysticks. A gamepad is used for playing video games of many types, including sports, first-person shooters, role-playing, and others. The picture shows different examples of gamepads for the computer and consoles. Tip If you're looking for the Game Controller settings in Windows, see our Game Controllers page. A gamepad is the primary peripheral device used on console gaming systems, like the Xbox, PlayStation, and Nintendo platforms. Some portable gaming systems have a gamepad built into the gaming device itself, like the Nintendo Switch. Many gamepads are also made to work with a computer, often using a USB (universal serial bus) connection. Some gamepads featuring haptic feedback allow a user to feel action in the game, by vibrating the controller. The first gamepad was introduced in 1985, first by Nintendo, then by Sega, for use with their video gaming systems. Since then, many forms of gamepads have been made and sold, but all still have a similar design. Note The term "game controller" also describes any input device used to play games. Game controllers could include gamepads, joysticks, steering wheels, paddle, and the keyboard and mouse. Related information How to set up or install a joystick or gamepad. Console vs. PC gaming. Gamepad and joystick help and support. Controller, Game terms, Input device, Joystick, Paddle, Peripheral Was this page useful? Yes No Feedback E-mail Share Print Search Recently added pages What is a Driver Updater? How to Insert Emojis in Microsoft Word. What is GenAI? How to Change Notification Settings on a Mac What is Snake Case? View all recent updates Useful links About Computer Hope Site Map Forum Contact Us How to Help Top 10 pages Follow us Facebook YouTube RSS © 2024 Computer Hope Legal Disclaimer - Privacy Statement