Pokémon data Game mechanics Pokémon games Community/Other Search PokéBase - Pokémon Q&A Meta Rate My Team Login Register All Activity Questions Unanswered Tags Users Ask a Question Rules Chat Why do old generation speedrunners play as the girl? 15 votes 3,643 views In every game from Crystal to ORAS, the current world record (glitchless) speedrunner played as the girl. This is probably not just a coincidence. I already know that in Emerald, the Route 110 rival battle is slightly easier if you play as May and battle Brendan. Please do not question my curiosity. speedrun ingame gender asked Mar 10, 2021 by sumwun edited Jul 29, 2021 by sumwun Show 11 previous comments Werster addresses this question in the FAQ for most of his runs. It is generally because the male character has less dialogue. commented Mar 10, 2021 by Fizz In Heartgold and soulsilver the female rival has an animation the boy rival skips commented Mar 21, 2021 by HelpMePlease edited Mar 21, 2021 by Terlor This answer is obviously incomplete. commented Mar 21, 2021 by sumwun The catching tutorial is faster. commented Mar 27, 2021 by BigBoii2929 edited Mar 27, 2021 by Fizz sumwun, if you don't mind me asking, what type of answer would you accept? it's pretty apparent based on the comments that it's just faster, so what typ of answer format would you prefer? all the examples from each game? commented Mar 27, 2021 by ~Silver~ 1 Answer 12 votes Best answer CRYSTAL: No difference. People just prefer Kris because she's the first playable female character and iconic. RS: No difference in male vs female. Source EMERALD: The male rival says less text than the female rival, and thus takes up less time. Also, for the Rival 2 fight, the male rival leads Slugma, and the female rival leads Wingull. In that fight you have to set up 2 X Attacks and an X Speed to take down the Grovyle, however the wingull knows growl. As you can only afford a maximum of 3 X Attacks up to this point (and normally only have 2), getting growl from the wingull can be a run killer. The slugma however only knows yawn and ember, and there is a full heal hidden just before Rival 2 as a safety against getting burned by ember. However, because the slugma knows yawn, and male Rival 3 has a Pelliper where female Rival 3 has a wingull, these fights are actually slower. It is still worth it regardless to choose the female though. Source, thanks SS FRLG: gender doesn't matter. Source HGSS: Lyra talks too much to Ethan. If you play as Lyra, you don't have to listen to her. Source DPPt: The girl is slightly faster than the boy for speedrunning because Lucas has less to say than Dawn. commented Mar 10 by J™ BW/2: Nothing noted here in terms of gender, just game versions. XY: X is faster because you can keep the Battle Style on Set for the final Lyandre battle, but in Pokémon Y, this is not possible because Lysandre sends his Pokémon out in a different order. The time difference is quite small in comparison to version differences of other paired games. When you pick the girl, your rival (Calem) will have a slower Meowstic at Coumarine City, meaning that your Hawlucha is more likely to outspeed it, which makes the run safer. Source TL;DR: it's usually faster in either dialogue or battles answered Mar 27, 2021 by ~Silver~ selected Mar 28, 2021 by sumwun Related questions Is there a reason for speedrunners to change the frame on Gen 3 speedruns? What Teams and Strategies can I use to speedrun ORAS? Optimal method to speedrun Sw/Sh? The Best Team For Speedrunning Pokemon Black? Which Kanto starter is best to speedrun Red? Speedrun glitches. Red/Blue/Yellow? Why do some Pokemon have gender ratios that are higher than the others? In Magical Pokemon Journey, is Eevee a boy or a girl? Useful Posts PokéBase starter guide How to change your username How to add a user avatar Why was my post hidden? The points system Flags vs Downvotes Report users PokemonDb Tournaments PokemonDb Discord server PokemonDb Showdown server Privacy Policy All content & design © Pokémon Database, 2008-2024. Pokémon images & names © 1995-2024 Nintendo/Game Freak.