Bachelors There are five men you can marry if you're playing as the female protagonist. The villagers have select gifts that they love, which results with a heart icon on their portrait when you give the gift. Most other gifts will be accepted and result with a music note on their portrait. There are select gifts that they don't like, which results in no emotion icon. You won't lose affection if you give a bad gift. Braden Braden is the first farmer you'll meet after leaving mom's house to journey into the world. He has a ranch full of cows in Calisson. Braden is heavily invested in his cows, so much so that he wants to do anything to keep them safe, even if it means coming off as rude when talking to outsiders. Besides cows, Braden has an interest in painting. The neighborhood kid, Elijah, likes to hang out at Braden's ranch to learn about cows and paints. Birthday Spring 19 Gift Preferences Heart Gifts: Hot Chocolate Liked Gifts: Grass, Egg, Milk, Sunflower Dislikes: Tomato Heart Events 0.5 Hearts: Next to the stone with the dog painting you'll find Braden teaching Elijah how to paint. Elijah tells you about Hazy Doe, the anonymous painter. One of Hazy's paintings can be found on the stone right here. Elijah tells you how much he likes Hazy's paintings and the meaning behind the art. One day he would like to paint just like Hazy. Braden tells Elijah that he should paint the way he wants to paint. Best choice: You need to develop your own style. 1.5 Hearts: Walk down the hill from the higher area of Calisson, close to the stone with the dog painting on it. The rancher is handling paper that he says Elijah left behind. You mention that the handwriting on the papers looks similar to the signature style of Hazy Doe. Well, there's a reason for that... Braden requests that you keep it a secret. Hazy Doe needs to be kept in the shadows. Best choice: You still want to keep it a secret? 2.5 Hearts: Talk to Braden when he and Elijah are by the dog-painted stone. Elijah is excited because he found another Hazy Doe painting in Halo Halo. The meaning of the painting must be to keep trying and never give up. Elijah wants to paint pictures that have a message of their own. After he leaves, Branden tells you the story of his first secret drawing. Everyone interpreted it to have some sort of hidden meaning, but Braden didn't say anything because he didn't want to get into trouble for drawing on a tree. Best choice: I agree with you, Elijah! 3.5 hearts: Talk to Braden when he is standing by his house in the morning. Braden is glad you've stopped by. It must be nice traveling around the world. Braden has to tend to the cows, so you offer to help him with his work. Afterward, Braden is grateful for your help. He gives you a portrait he drew of you. Braden's view of certain things had changed lately. He wanted to change, but didn't know how. Pouring one's feelings into art doesn't actually solve one's problems. You have helped change his reality. Braden is glad to hear that you like both Braden's art and his alter-ego Hazy Doe's art. While Braden wants to continue to paint as Hazy to make people happy, he intends to continue to work on his ranch as Braden. He feels he can overcome his own problems with a willpower as strong as yours. If possible, Braden would prefer to take this challenge on with you by his side. He doesn't expect your answer right away. He'll be waiting here at his ranch for your answer. (This event does not have options to select and ends at 5:00 pm.) Kanoa The manager of the Halo Halo fishing boats, Kanoa is a cheerful fellow who loves the sea. He keeps an eye on the villagers who risk their lives to sail out into the ocean to catch fish for the village, and jumps into action when there's a problem with the catch. Kanoa loves to eat well-prepared fish. He spends the day along the shorelines, watching over the fishing ship, then will go to Cafe Mahalo for lunch. Birthday Summer 26 Gift Preferences Heart Gifts: Seabream Meuniere Liked Gifts: Coconut Milk, Egg, Large Clam, Lobster, Watermelon Dislikes: Milk Heart Events 0.5 Hearts: Talk to Kanoa as he stands on the shore. He invites you to go fishing with him, but before you head out, a villager runs in and tells him there's an emergency! One of the fishing boats was engulfed with something mysterious, but everyone made it out okay. Kanoa wonders what happened... hmm... Best choice: We must solve this mystery! 1.5 Hearts: Talk to him at the shoreline again. He's been researching the sea mystery from before and thinks he found a clue. The tidal currents might have caused the mess. Kanoa is always ready to stand up and protect his village. He's glad to know that you're still willing to lend a hand. Best choice: You are one cool guy, Kanoa! 2.5 Hearts: Walk into Halo Halo and you'll find Kanoa with the fishermen. Kanoa's theory about the tidal current didn't work out, and he's frustrated he hasn't found an answer. Holokai tells him the story of the Sea Lord who only appears on cloudy days. Kanoa is determined to try and fight the Sea Lord. He can't just sit around and do nothing! The fishermen confirm they heard a voice when their boat capsized, but it sounded like the voice was in pain. Holokai heard there's a vet to the west who can heal any animal wound. Best choice: I'm worried. It won't be so easy. 3.5 Hearts: Walk into the beach area in the morning. A villager welcome up to you and tell you that Kanoa got some medicine from a vet out west and is going out to sea by himself to give the medicine to the Sea Lord. The villagers offered to help, but Kanoa didn't want to put anyone else in harm's way. The fishermen ask that you go talk some sense into him. You run to the dock with the villager, where Kanoa tells you this is something he has to do himself; he doesn't want anyone else to get hurt. This is the Sea Lord he's going up against, so his reflexes must be lightning quick. Kanoa asks that you wait here for safe return. Kanoa soon returns and gives news of his success. Now the sea is back to being calm and relaxed! The western vet's medicine quickly healed the Sea Lord. Kanoa notices your aggravated demeanor and says he's sorry for worrying you. The only reason he was able to make it back was because he knew you were waiting for him. Thinking of you gives him a sense of life; he gets a hot feeling in his chest, and his heart beats quickly. Kanoa explains that he finally figured out that this feeling he's feeling is love and professes his love for you. A large shadow appears under Kanoa's boat and then swims away. It appears that the Sea Lord approves of Kanoa's declaration of love. (This event does not have options to select) Jamil Jamil runs the animal shop in Pastilla with his mom. He likes to care for all animals, but has a soft spot in his heart for camels. After the Dead Forest fire, Jamil took in many of the wild animals to care for them while they recovered. He knows a lot about the wild animals in the area as well as domesticated animals you can buy from their shop. Jamil's mom will give him a hard time for not having a girlfriend. Birthday Summer 3 Gift Preferences Heart Gifts: Goat Milk Liked Gifts: Apple, Araucana Egg, Barley, Coconut, Coconut Milk, Coffee, Compost, Egg, Grass, Grilled Goby, Level 1 Animal Feed, Level 2 Animal Feed, Lotus, Milk, Orange Bell Pepper, Peach, Rye, Strawberry, Sunflower, Tomato, Walnut Bread Dislikes: Tuna Carpaccio Heart Events 0.5 Hearts: Walk close to the camel pen and you'll find Jamil upset about two of his friends. He describes them with such affection that it takes a while to realize he's referring to camels and not people. Jamil feels better after talking to you. Best choice: Oh no! Now I'm crying too! 1.5 Hearts: Talk to Jamil. Maybe you'd like a tour of the desert? Jamil takes you out to the sands to tell you about the wild animals that live there. A tiger gets a little too close for Jamil's comfort, but he protects you until the tiger wanders off. It's always important to respect the wild animals. Jamil wonders if you're always such a risk taker. You're a special friend, and Jamil asks you to be more careful. Best choice: I'll be more careful from now on! 2.5 Hearts: Walk to the animal shop, and you'll find Jamil complaining about the heat. He gives you some advice on how to stay comfortable in the sweltering weather. It looks like he's excessively worrying about you, but he points out that you did first meet when you were passed out from heat exhaustion. A Pastilla citizen appears to thank you. The crops you grew were fantastic! He offers to take you on a camel ride to pay you back for your assistance. Jamil immediately interrupts and says that he'd like your help with something, then whisks you away. Truthfully, Jamil didn't need help with anything. He reveals that he felt uneasy with you talking with the other fellow. He isn't sure what this feeling is. Best choice: Might that feeling be jealousy? 3.5 Hearts: Walk towards the camel pen in Pastilla, but you don't see Jamil around. The other villagers says he should be around somewhere. Turns out he's on the other side of the pond, but then he runs away. You catch up to him before he enters his house. Jamil confesses that he's become afraid of you. It's not that he doesn't like you, but seeing you talk with that other guy, and the way he reacted, made him feel ashamed of himself. Jamil assumed you were disgusted by his behavior and admits that he was jealous. That feeling is something he hadn't experienced before. He wants to do so many things for you, even more than what he does for his animals. You're a very important person, and he just wanted to let you know. (This event does not have options to select) Tristan A baker by trade, Tristan lives with his sister, Laura, in Lebkuchen. His father was a great bread baker and taught Tristan the ins and outs of bread making. He does the best he can with the ingredients he has, but frustrated with the results of his efforts. Caring for Laura's memory loss is a heavy burden on him. He looks young and acts tough as a result of being responsible for his sister's care. Tristan's baking skills will improve as you help him to restore the flame in the local sacred hearth. Birthday Spring 9 Gift Preferences Heart Gifts: J. Cheese Fondue Liked Gifts: Camembert Cheese, Chickpea, Coffee Bread, Egg, Goat Milk, Grilled Goby, Hollyhock, Milk, Rye, Walnut Bread, Wheat Dislikes: Bean Soup Heart Events 0.5 Hearts: Walk into the cheese and bread store to learn that Tristan is over at his farm. He is there just to see how everything has improved. He thanks you for everything you've done for Lebkuchen. How did you learn so much about farm animals, anyway? Tristan is grateful for any help you can give him. Best choice: I studied up! 1.5 Hearts: Walk to the goat farm area. Tristan is a bit overwhelmed with all the positive changes that have taken place in Lebkuchen. He's happy, but it has all happened so fast; he hasn't had time to process it all. He can't spend any time goofing off now that the family farm is back up and running. You've been a great help. Tristan then realizes you're really just here for the cheese and bread. It feels good to laugh again.