The Anubis Collection
2023.04.24 -
Since November, players have been peeking mid and rushing through the waters of Anubis.
Today we’re introducing the Anubis Collection, featuring 19 weapon finishes themed around the newest addition to Counter-Strike’s Active Duty map pool.
The Anubis Collection is available for purchase now in-game.
  Case, Capsule, Kit, Oh My!
2023.02.09 -
Today we’re excited to ship the Revolution Case, featuring 17 weapon finishes from community artists and the gloves from the Clutch Case as rare special items.
We’re also shipping the Espionage Sticker Capsule, with 21 unique stickers from Steam Workshop artists.
Finally, we’re also shipping the Denzel Curry ULTIMATE music kit, featuring Denzel’s hits “Walkin”, “ULTIMATE”, and more from his 2022 album “Melt My Eyez See Your Future”.
All three of these offerings are now available in-game!
  At Your Service
2022.12.13 -

All ranked-up and ready to go? The all-new 2023 Service Medal will be available starting January 1st!
Earn XP by playing in official game modes and rank up your CS:GO Profile. When you reach the Global General (Rank 40), you’ll have the option to reset your Profile Rank and earn (or upgrade) a 2023 Service Medal. The medal is an inspectable display item you can show off wherever your avatar is shown.
Today’s update also includes two new community wingman maps: Boyard and Chalice. Each offers a different spin on Wingman gameplay, with quick engagements on Boyard and long-distance duels on Chalice.
Jump into a wingman match to check them out, and earn some more XP!
  Anu Map Who Bis
2022.11.18 -
Today’s update includes an adjustment to the Active Duty map pool as well as some weapon adjustments.

For starters, we’re making changes to the Active Duty map pool, which will determine which maps get played at the 2023 Paris Major.
Anubis is being added to Active Duty and Dust II is being removed. But both maps are still available in Casual, Deathmatch, and Competitive modes.
We’re also making some adjustments to weapons. The AWP has had its magazine size reduced to five bullets (so make them count!), and the M4A1-S now does less damage at long ranges.
Try the changes out and let us know what you think!
And thanks for the blog post title, Ryan (@Schaffurr)!
  IEM Rio Major Champions
2022.11.15 -

Over the past two weeks Rio de Janeiro has been the center of Counter-Strike, where 24 of the best teams in the world fought to become IEM Rio Major champions. In the end, only one team was left standing as Outsiders bested Heroic on Mirage and Overpass to secure their first Major championship!
To celebrate our new champions, today we’re releasing the champions autograph capsule, featuring autographs from FL1T, fame, Jame, n0rb3r7, and Qikert in paper, glitter, holo, and gold.
A New Path to the Majors
Starting with the 2023 Paris Major, we’re going to change the way we invite teams to the RMRs.
Previously teams entered the RMRs by direct invitation, or through a series of open qualifiers. For Paris, some teams who aren’t directly invited will get to skip the open qualifiers–teams that consistently perform well in Valve and third-party events will be directly invited to a closed qualifier. There, they’ll compete against teams that enter from an open qualifier.
In the coming weeks we’ll reveal more detail about the new Regional Standings process.
Congratulations to Outsiders, and we’ll see you in Paris!
  <<..Older posts
English
23,840,902
UNIQUE PLAYERS LAST MONTH
Play CS:GO on Steam
Get CS:GO Merchandise
MAJOR UPDATES



MAJOR TOURNAMENTS AND CHAMPIONS



CS:GO COMMUNITY WORKSHOPS


© 2024 Valve Corporation, all rights reserved. Valve, the Valve logo, Source, the Source logo, Steam, the Steam logo, Counter-Strike, and the Counter-Strike logo are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of the Valve Corporation.