HOME WHAT’S NEW? VIDEOS WARCRAFT SWTOR FINAL FANTASY KINGDOM HEARTS SUMMARY ART VRYKERION Hail to the Hat Kingdom Hearts Story Summary (In Chronological Order) Welcome to the Kingdom Hearts Story Summary. As stated in the title, this Summary attempts to guide you through the story of the entire Kingdom Hearts franchise in chronological order of the games’ universe instead of the release order of the games. If you would like a short overview of the order of the games without tons of spoilers, you can find it here on this older post. As stated, this post WILL contain MASSIVE SPOILERS for the Kingdom Hearts series of games. I’ve also included a FAQ section at the bottom for some of the more confusing details I’ve had people ask me about the story, and I’ve tried to answer them the best I can. If you have a question you’d like me to try to answer, feel free to leave it in a comment or send me a tweet @Vrykerion with your question and I’ll see what I can do. 0.0) Chi/Unchained Chi/Back Cover The tale begins in the Age of Fairy Tales where the Master of Masters has entrusted each of his five apprentices with a copy of the Book of Prophecies – a tome that contains the future but also contains other power like the ability to create worlds. The Book foretells of a dire event coming where all out war will consume the world and Darkness will swallow the Light. The Master of Masters warns his apprentices that this event is set in stone and is impossible to change, so not to fixate on it. Instead, plan for what comes next. He also bestows a special task on each of his apprentices: Ira is given the task of being the leader, Aced is given the task of supporting Ira and taking his place should Ira prove unreliable at his task, Invi was tasked with observing her fellow apprentices and acting as a mediator, Ava was given the goal of training ‘dandelions’ – keyblade wielders that will go forth after the war to help rebuild, and Gula was given a ‘missing page’ from the Book of Prophecy that speaks of a traitor and is tasked with discovering who it is. The Master of Masters final apprentice – Luxu – who was not given a copy of the book. Instead, Luxu was entrusted with the Master of Masters’ keyblade that had one of his eyes grafted into it and told to take the keyblade and use it to witness the events in the future, so the Masters current self could see them and create the Book of Prophecies. He also entrusts Luxu with a trunk that he is told to never open. With that done, the Master of Masters vanishes without a trace and shortly after Luxu does as well. The remaining five apprentices go about their other main task – the formation of Unions. Unions would be a unified team of Keyblade wielders that would work to carry out each Union’s goals, namely the gathering of Lux (Light) from various worlds that are eventually revealed to be artificial worlds created by the Book of Prophecies. This goal eventually starts to drive a wedge between the five apprentices – now called Foretellers – as accusations of stealing Lux and fierce competition creates animosity between the Unions. All the while behind the scenes, the Foretellers grow increasingly worried about a potential Traitor among them and begin to plot against each other. Finally, with the Unions at each other’s throats and the Foretellers turned against each other, do all five go to war. In an event that history would come to know as the Keyblade War, scores of keyblade wielders died in a fierce battle between the Unions to lay claim to the light for their own faction. Kingdom Hearts, the source of all Light, was swallowed up by the darkness and on a hill in the distance stands Luxu, holding the Master of Masters’ keyblade. 0.0) Union Cross Following the events of the Keyblade War, the Keyblade Wielders that survived awoke in various worlds that they had visited in that were created by the Book of Prophecy. The Keyblade War remembered only as a terrible dream as they continued on their adventures and making friends in Daybreak Town and various worlds. However, things weren’t like they were before. The Foretellers were gone. In their place, five specially selected members of the Dandelions were to take over and form new Unions and lead the remaining Keyblade Wielders. They were presented with special books that would guide them crafted by Master Ava. One girl who received such a book – Sterletzia – is murdered by a shadowy figure and her book stolen. The other new leaders assemble: Skuld & Ephemera (friends of the player character), Brain – an inquisitive fellow who hides his face with a big hat, Lauriam – a pink haired boy and Sterletzia’s brother, and Ventus – a blonde kid. They begin to work together to figure out solutions for those who remain and how best to move forward. To assist them, a single copy of the Book of Prophecy was left in the Foreteller’s Tower for them. So they start, not knowing that one among them isn’t supposed to be there. Meanwhile, Malificent has appeared within the world and has begun to try to enact her plan before Sora could even exist. But despite her knowledge of the future, she cannot even succeed in the Enchanted Dominion let alone escape to the outside like she had before. A shadowy figure appears to confront her explaining that she can’t change the scenario that’s been created. Inquiring further, the Shadow explains to Maleficent that without the Book of Prophecy, no worlds could be created. So in preparation for the events after the Keyblade War – Data Worlds were created instead. All of the worlds that the Book of Prophecy created were re-created in Data Form for the Keyblade Wielders. When Maleficent leapt through time, she didn’t land in her Enchanted Dominion but the data version. Because of that, she is stuck in the same loop regardless of what she tries to do. However, the shadowy figure can help her get back to her own time. (Union Cross is still actively being updated as of the time of this writing. I will attempt to keep this roughly up to date as plot points arise) 0.1) Birth By Sleep In a more recent time, a trio of keyblade wielders named Ventus, Terra and Aqua seek to complete their training and earn their Mark of Mastery – a symbol of keyblade mastery that demonstrates one’s ability to resist the darkness. Aqua and Terra are both being tested for the Mark under the supervision of Master Eraqus and his colleague and current wielder of the Master of Masters’ Keyblade – Xehanort. Xehanort however tampers with the testing, allowing for the darkness to manifest during the trial. Aqua manages to overcome the challenge and earns her Mark, but much to Xehanort’s delight Terra seems to give into the darkness. While Eraqus will not grant Terra the Mark of Mastery, he has need of both Terra and Aqua to address the matter of a growing number of creatures in the worlds called ‘The Unversed’. Eraqus then asks Aqua in secret to watch over Terra and make sure he doesn’t stray into the Darkness. Meanwhile, Ven is provoked into leaving as well by Xehanort’s apprentice Vanitas. At this point, the three young keyblade wielders’ stories divide. Terra’s journey has him seeking out the now missing Master Xehanort who appears to searching for the Seven Princesses of Pure Hearts. On his journey, he unwillingly collaborates with a number of Disney Villains including Maleficent to discover the whereabouts of Xehanort. At one point, Terra visits a world called Destiny Islands where he encounters a pair of young boys named Riku and Sora. Seeing the potential of heroism in the young Riku, Terra performs a ritual that marks Riku as the next in line to inherit Terra’s keyblade. When he finally locates the Master, Xehanort warns him that Eraqus is betraying Terra by holding back his potential and can’t be trusted. This is only confirmed when Terra returns to Master Eraqus only to find him attacking Ventus. Terra intervenes and ultimately ends up slaying his teacher and father figure, driving Terra to flee. Ventus’ tale however confronts the matter of Ven’s dark past. A former disciple of Xehanort, the Master pushed Ven to the limits to rip apart the boy’s heart and parsing out the Light from the Dark. Ventus only survived the ordeal thanks to a young boy named Sora who agreed to lend the light of his heart to Ventus. Xehanort hopes to pit Ventus against his darker half – Vanitas – to create a weapon known as the X-Blade (Chi-Blade). The ultimate and original keyblade that is fabled to have the power to open up the heart of all worlds and the source of all light – Kingdom Hearts. When Ventus confronts Eraqus about this fact, Eraqus realizes that the only way to stop Xehanort from getting the X-Blade and Kingdom Hearts is to destroy Ven. The battle is interrupted by Terra who kills Eraqus and drives Ven into despair. Aqua’s journey is spent trying to find her two friends who she worries about. Visiting many worlds after Terra has visited them, she learns of all the horrible things Terra has done allying himself with the villains and fears that she is losing him to the darkness. She also struggles to convey her concerns to Ven, who lashes out at her like she was an over-concerned parent who doesn’t understand Terra. Aqua too travels to the Destiny Islands where she meets the young boys Riku and Sora, and while tempted to bestow her keyblade to Sora like she senses Terra did for Riku, she worries that it would ruin their friendship. Instead, she accidentally bequeaths her keyblade to a young princess she encounters on the world of Radiant Gardens named Kairi who unknowingly triggers the ritual by grabbing the handle of Aqua’s keyblade. Aqua also meets at several points with the powerful sorcerer Yen Sid and joins forces with his young apprentice, Mickey Mouse, across several worlds before ultimately learning of Eraqus’ death and is ordered by Yen Sid to go find her friends at the Keyblade Graveyard. The three friends reunite twice in their journeys. The first is at Radiant Gardens after they have each had run ins with Xehanort’s newest lacky, a guard by the name of Braig who wants the power that Xehanort is offering. The last time is at the Keyblade Graveyard, the site where countless years ago the Foretellers’ and their Unions did battle and brought about the destruction of Light. It’s here where the climactic showdown with the grand puppetmaster behind their conflicts as well as the creator of the Unversed – Master Xehanort and his apprentice Vanitas – occurs. Ven and Aqua face off against Vanitas only for Ven to have his heart absorbed and turned into the X-Blade. Aqua is able to defeat Vanitas with the help of Mickey. Terra however faces off with Xehanort himself but is defeated when Xehanort uses the Master of Masters’ keyblade to unlock his own heart and transfer into Terra’s body which turns his long hair a stark white and makes his eyes glow yellow. However, Terra’s pure willpower is bound to his keyblade armor which acts on his own to strike down Terra-Xehanort. At the same time, Aqua’s defeat of Vanitas and the shattering of the now declared ‘imperfect X-blade’ triggers a massive pillar of light to consume the graveyard. Terra-Xehanort is swept away, Terra’s lingering will stays planted there, and Aqua and Ven flee to be found by Mickey. In the aftermath of the battle, Aqua takes Ven’s now heart-less body back to the Land of Departure where they were raised by Eraqus. The Land of Departure had been consumed by the Darkness after Master Eraqus’ death, but Aqua carries Ven into the throne room of the palace and uses Eraqus’ keyblade to put the entire castle into a secret lockdown mode.