Newsletter Log in Trending Final Fantasy 7 Rebirth Helldivers 2 Unicorn Overlord Infinite Craft Disney Lorcana Roblox Events Release Dates Home Triple-A Games Rune Factory 4 Special: Complete Romance Guide BY RYAN THOMAS BAMSEY UPDATED APR 20, 2023 Learn how to date and get married to all the romanceable singles in RF4, including how to complete their Town Events. This article is part of a directory: Rune Factory 4 Special - Complete Guide And Walkthrough Table Of Contents Quick Links The Bachelors And Bachelorettes Dating Marriage Parenthood Arthur's Town Events Doug's Town Events Dylas's Town Events Kiel's Town Events Leon's Town Events Vishnal's Town Events Amber's Town Events Clorica's Town Events Dolce's Town Events Forte's Town Events Margaret's Town Events Xiao Pai's Town Events In the grand tradition of farming simulators since the dawn of time, Rune Factory 4 allows your character to romance and marry the bachelor or bachelorette of their choosing. Needless to say, striking up a romance and getting married is not a simple process. RELATED: Rune Factory 4 Special: Harvest Festival Guide There's quite a lot of luck involved in charming the future spouse of your dreams, but there are certainly ways to minimize its influence. With the best gifts, dating techniques, and perhaps some cheeky save/reloading, you will undoubtedly be successful in love. Updated April 20, 2023: We've gone over this guide to make sure our advice is clear and readable, and that the details are accurate. Happy romancing out there! The Bachelors And Bachelorettes There are 14 romanceable characters in Rune Factory 4, six men and six women. Four of these characters are not present in Selphia when you begin the game but will join the town during the first act when you beat certain bosses. Bachelors Bachelorettes Arthur Clorica Doug Forte Kiel Margaret Vishnal Xiao Pai Late Arrivals Dylas Amber Leon Dolce You will know that a character is a potential romance candidate if a short anime-style sequence plays when you first talk to them. Unfortunately, there is no same-sex romance in the game. A male main character can only date and marry the bachelorette characters, and a female main character can only date and marry the bachelor characters. Dating Dialogue in Rune Factory 4 Special highlighting the BTW button Once a character has a high enough friendship level with the main character, you can attempt to date them. To do this, press the BTW button as you would if you were asking them to accompany you on an adventure. Choose the "I love you" and the "I really love you" options to attempt to start a relationship. If they decline or think you are joking, you must wait until the next day to try again. This option has a higher chance of working with higher friendship levels, but can theoretically work as low as level four. It will always have a very low chance of working, so try to raise your friendship levels as high as possible. There are some extra things to keep in mind when trying to start a relationship: You cannot start a relationship with Leon or Dolce until you have started the game's second act (after the credits have rolled for the first time). You cannot start a relationship with Doug until you have started the game's third act (after the credits have rolled for the second time). Arranging a date with Clorica in Rune Factory 4 Special Once you are in a relationship, it will be even more difficult to confess your love to other characters - but not impossible. You are also able to take your partner on dates now. Asking your partner out on a date is done from the BTW menu. You will arrange to meet them at a specific time the next day, and you can choose the location of the date. Some locations, such as the General Store, will reward you with items for choosing them. Marriage It will eventually be possible to marry your partner, but there are a few prerequisites before even attempting it: You must have viewed a particular Town Event involving your partner. The specific Town Events for each potential partner are listed at the bottom of this guide. You must be at friendship level ten with your partner. You must have been on at least three dates with your partner. You must have a double bed. This can be purchased from the furniture shop, which must be unlocked with an order. Depending on who you are dating, you must also have an engagement ring. If you are playing the male character and are dating any bachelorette except Xiao Pai, you must have an Engagement Ring. If you are dating Xiao Pai or are playing the female character, you will not need the Engagement Ring. If you were proposed by Xiao Pai or any of the bachelors and turned them down, you can propose to them at a later date with the Engagement Ring. The Engagement Ring is an accessory that can be crafted at the Crafting Table. The recipe is as follows: one item of the Minerals category, one item of the Jewels category. The cheapest combination would be a chunk of Iron and an Amethyst. But do you really want to cheap out on your proposal? Once all the prerequisites are satisfied, a Town Event can randomly trigger where you will either be proposed to or be prompted to propose. You can decline at this point, but from here on out, you can propose to your partner at any time as long as you have an Engagement Ring. Once married, your spouse will move in, and any relationships you had with other single residents will immediately end. Parenthood Clorica holding a baby in Rune Factory 4 Special Within one month of being married, your spouse will begin to talk about having a child. Soon after, either you or your wife will fall pregnant with a child. Speak with your spouse after this happens to determine the gender of the child. You can either choose the gender or let the game choose for you. In Rune Factory 4, gestation takes 20 days. Once this time has elapsed your child will be born, and after a few scenes, the game will skip ahead a few years to allow the child to grow up and become a fully-fledged NPC with their own dialogue, likes and dislikes, and even stats. That's right, you can take your child out to dangerous dungeons like any other NPC in the game! Once you have a child, if you take them to the Sechs Territory, you can obtain a White Stone on the westernmost screen of the area that is shaped a bit like a gun. Town Events Guide One of the prerequisites to marriage is viewing a Town Event that focuses on your chosen partner specifically. These happen randomly once their own prerequisites are met and can be viewed over multiple days. Getting a specific Town Event to spawn is a matter of luck, so you may want to try reloading on a day without an upcoming birthday or festival to get one to spawn. Each potential spouse also has their own marriage-specific Town Event with steps to follow. Only one Town Event can be active at any time, so complete any that appear as soon as possible. Arthur's Town Events To marry Arthur, you will need to have completed two Town Events: Don't Forget Your Physical When this event is active, speak to Jones, Porcoline, and Margaret in that order. Bring Margaret to speak with Porcoline and then examine the table in Arthur's office. Speak to Jones again and then head to the screen east of the entrance to Yokmir Forest. After the scene outside town, report back to Jones and then speak to him again on the following day. Eyeglass Mania Speak to Arthur and accept his request. Examine all of the items in Arthur's office and then check all the objects upstairs in Arthur's room when prompted. Speak to Arthur once every object has been examined. Once you have completed these, you will need to wait for the Transient Vision Town Event to begin. Head to Arthur's office with Vishnal and talk to him. Agree to meet with him. On the following day, head outside and watch the scene. Speak with the Traveler, Vishnal, and Arthur. Afterwards, speak to Forte in Arthur's office. Leave town and head to Arthur's icon on the minimap. After a few days, you will be prompted to follow Arthur to Volkanon's room. After this, go to Arthur's office. Now, speak to Volkanon, Kiel, Porcoline, Bado, and Arthur. Head home and watch the scene. On the following day, go back to where you found Arthur outside town for the marriage event. Doug's Town Events To marry Doug, you will need to have completed two Town Events: Doug's Secret Speak to Doug and Blossom at the General Store and then wait until 7:00. Follow Doug until you reach a scene and then speak to Margaret. Do the same on the following day and the day after. On the third day, speak to Blossom after the event at the restaurant. Shiny Memories After an event with a bird, examine the right-hand side of the building. On the following day, speak to Blossom. On the following day, speak to Xiao Pai. On the following day, go to the General Store for an event. Do the same with the restaurant on the next day. On the next day after that, watch an event at Arthur's office. Go to the General Store and then follow Doug to the castle for a scene. On the next day, leave your house and go speak to Blossom. Once you have completed these, the A Very Special Ring event can trigger. Once the event is active, talk to Doug. On the following day, talk to Doug and agree to the date. On the third day, go on the date with Doug to the lake. On the fourth day, you need to speak with all of the other bachelors in their bedrooms before talking to Doug once more. On the fifth day, you will need to follow Doug to Bado's shop and then talk to him. On the next day, you can talk to Amber, Dolce, and Clorica in front of your house. On the seventh day, talk to all of the bachelorettes. There will be a scene with the bachelorettes on the eighth day - speak to Doug afterward. On the penultimate day, you need to talk to Clorica, Dole, and Margaret outside Bado's. Talk to the bachelorettes again, then Doug, and then wait until nighttime before heading to your room. Talk to Doug on the next day for the marriage event. Dylas's Town Events There is only one Town Event needed to marry Dylas: Smile Practice Speak to Dylas once this event is triggered. Go to the restaurant and talk to Dylas in his room - choose the option to tell him not to give up. Speak to all the residents in town and then return to Dylas. Talk to Porcoline after this. Once this has been completed, you unlock the For Clumsy You event. Talk to Dylas and then follow him to Bado's shop. Talk to him again here. Do this again for three days. On the fourth day of the event, talk to everyone you can in town. On the next day, meet Dylas in front of your room. Do this again on the following day for the marriage scene. Kiel's Town Events Kiel has two Town Event requirements before the marriage event can trigger: The Knight's Steed Speak to Forte. On the next two days, go to the airship landing for two events. Then, head to Bado's shop for another event. After this, there will be an event in the town square and a final event triggered by leaving town to the south. A Part-Time Job Speak to Kiel inside his home. After this, view a scene at the hot springs with Kiel and Xiao Pai - speak to them both afterward. Do this again on the next day. Follow Kiel after speaking to him, there will be two events to view with him. The next event takes place