NEWS EXCLUSIVES RUMORS GUIDES FEATURES LISTS WORK WITH US Bryson Maddock·Lists·December 22, 2023·5 min read 10 BEST VIDEO GAME PROTAGONISTS OF ALL TIME Video games are a unique way to explore worlds, characters, storylines and more in a depth that no movie or show could provide you. Every video game has its own protagonist, and each one gives you a side of life to look at that you may have never thought to explore before. So which video game protagonists are the best of all time? The Best Protagonists in Video Game History Whether it’s an anti-hero or a true saviour, main characters in video games have given players something to strive for in life. These characters may teach us a lot about ourselves, giving us life lessons that help us understand more about the world. Here are the seven best video game protagonists of all time. 10. Joel Miller Because this character was also put into an extremely successful HBO series, Joel from The Last of Us is an easy pick for our list of the best video game protagonists. His ruggedness and push to survive make him the best person to travel with during a zombie apocalypse. Joel from The Last of Us is iconic and easily one of the best video game characters of all time. 9. Lara Croft With multiple games and movies utilizing her character, Lara Croft, from the infamous Tomb Raider titles, has given gamers a sense of perseverance when faced with extreme and difficult obstacles. Her push to always explore the unknown, while also being a crazy fighter, makes her an ideal candidate for someone to explore a dungeon with. Lara Croft is a prime example of having a good heart and always pushing forward, making her one of the greatest video game protagonists of all time. 8. Geralt of Rivia You can’t have a list of the best video game protagonists of all time without including Geralt of Rivia from The Witcher. Geralt not only put many before him, but he was simply an awesome character to fight monsters with. Geralt of Rivia, the mysterious monster hunter, takes the cake as one of the best video game characters of all time. 7. Solid Snake Solid Snake is a quite legendary character, hailing from the Metal Gear Solid franchise. Not only is his stealth on another level (yes, we are talking about hiding in a cardboard box), but the intense action he shows off has always been a favourite amongst gamers. Solid Snake is a legendary character and has been in other games such as Fortnite and Super Smash Bros., making him an obvious pick for our list. 6. Red The infamous Red from the original Pokemon games has got to be one of the best and most iconic video game characters of all time. This was the first time players were thrown into the world of Pokemon, with Red giving them one of the greatest introductions known to man. Red was Pokemon players’ first introduction when exploring the world of Pokemon, making him one of the greatest video game protagonists of all time. 5. Kratos Kratos from God of War is the perfect example of an almighty brute who, despite his anger and strength, kills out of vengeance and not being evil. While some dispute whether he is good or evil, you cannot deny that Kratos is one of the best main characters in all of video game history. Kratos is amazing and easily one of the best characters in all of fiction. 4. Arthur Morgan Arthur Morgan is simply one of the greatest video game characters of all time, there is no debating that. His role in Red Dead Redemption 2 was riveting. Not once during the game do you wish for his downfall. Arthur Morgan, despite being somewhat of an anti-hero, is easily one of the best protagonists you can play as in the video game world. 3. Master Chief Master Chief is just a great representation of perseverance. This man single-handedly carried the Halo campaigns on his back, making for one great main character. Everyone loves Master Chief, whether you are a Halo fanatic or not. Master Chief is a pure example of always doing the right thing and pushing forward during hard battles, making him one of the greatest video game characters of all time. Related: Epic Games Wants Super Mario Skins in Fortnite 2. Mario Mario will go down in history as one of the best video game protagonists of all time. Not only has this red-hatted plumber been on some of the craziest missions in video game history, but he has never once given up on saving his princess. Mario is iconic, with some of the most titles using his name in the entire video game world. 1. Link Link from The Legend of Zelda has been exploring Hyrule, saving the princess, fighting monsters and more before the majority of you were even born. This legendary character shows us exactly what it means to be a hero, making him the best video game protagonist of all time. Despite his lack of talking, Link has always been a perfect example of a hero, making him the greatest video game protagonist of all time. Related: 6 Best Zelda Games, Ranked Worst to Best Related All Mainline Yakuza Games, Ranked Best To Worst In "Lists" Assassin’s Creed Red: Everything we Know so far About Assassin’s Creed Red In "News" All Grand Theft Auto Protagonists Ranked In "Lists" TAGS GAMING SHARE TWEET PIN Bryson Maddock TRENDING POSTS IS HELLDIVERS 2 COMING TO XBOX? – ANSWERED EXCLUSIVE – DETAILS ON ASSASSIN’S CREED RED’S ENGINE, BASE BUILDING, COMBAT, AND MORE EXCLUSIVE – DETAILS ON PROJECT OVER – THE NEXT MAINLINE GHOST RECON GAME HOW TO FIX FRIEND REQUEST NOT WORKING IN HELLDIVERS 2 Bryson Maddock·Lists·December 22, 2023·3 min read 5 BEST GAMES LIKE THE WITCHER 3 The Witcher 3, winner of the Game of the Year in 2015, has held a place in gamers’ hearts since its release. This massive open-world fantasy adventure has so much to offer and never lacks when it comes to intense gameplay. But what games are there that are similar to The Witcher 3? Games Similar to The Witcher 3 Fantasy open-world games are quite common in the gaming world. People have been making titles like these since the 1980s with games like The Legend of Zelda. The Witcher 3, though, was a title that helped push the fantasy open-world style of video games to the next level. Its massive world mixed with an incredibly immersive world and beautiful graphics made it a game that is tough to rival. Here are the five best games like The Witcher 3. 5. Skyrim Skyrim is notoriously one of the most famous fantasy games of all time. This massive open-world adventure has more than enough gameplay to offer. In fact, many gamers don’t even follow the main storyline and instead spend their time exploring unique side quests. Skyrim is an obvious pick for games similar to The Witcher 3. 4. Shadow of Mordor The popular Lord of the Rings game, Shadow of Mordor is a great game for those looking for something similar to The Witcher 3 to play. The game allows you to explore Mordor within Middle Earth, helping to add to the lore of the popular movie and book trilogy. Shadow of Mordor is a great game to play if you enjoy The Witcher 3. Related: Red Dead Redemption 2 Is Still Selling Millions of Copies 3. Red Dead Redemption 2 While this game may not be about monsters and magic, Red Dead Redemption 2 still gives players that sense of adventure they long for. Its huge world and crazy storyline put it as a rival to The Witcher 3 as one of the greatest video games ever made. Red Dead Redemption 2 is an epic adventure that deserves playing, making it similar to The Witcher 3. 2. Dark Souls III Another game that rivals The Witcher 3’s challenging gameplay is Dark Souls III. Both of these titles have a unique style of gameplay that puts the players up against hordes of monsters. There will never be an easy route when playing Dark Souls III. Challenging? Yes. Worth playing? Of course. Dark Souls III is a great game for those looking to play something similar to The Witcher 3. 1. Elden Ring Elden Ring, winner of the Game of the Year in 2022 is by far the best game to play if you are a big fan of The Witcher 3. This huge open-world game mixes some of the toughest gameplay with a plethora of characters and monsters that will have you begging for more. Elden Ring is by far the best game to play for those looking for an adventure like The Witcher 3. Related: 5 Best Games Like Elden Ring TAGS THE WITCHER SHARE TWEET PIN TRENDING POSTS IS HELLDIVERS 2 COMING TO XBOX? – ANSWERED EXCLUSIVE – DETAILS ON ASSASSIN’S CREED RED’S ENGINE, BASE BUILDING, COMBAT, AND MORE EXCLUSIVE – DETAILS ON PROJECT OVER – THE NEXT MAINLINE GHOST RECON GAME HOW TO FIX FRIEND REQUEST NOT WORKING IN HELLDIVERS 2 Bryson Maddock·Lists·December 21, 2023·2 min read 5 BEST GAMES ON PLAYSTATION PLUS, RANKED Gamers who have subscribed to PlayStation Plus know that the program offers some of the best titles. All you have to pay is $79.99 USD a year, and each of these games becomes yours. But which games are the best to play right now on PlayStation Plus? Ranking the 5 Best Games to Play on PlayStation Plus While PlayStation Plus includes a lot of smaller indie titles, it also has some of the biggest games on the platform. While being updated monthly, you can always expect to see new titles added to the platform. Here are the five best games to play on PlayStation Plus, ranked from worst to best. 5. It Takes Two While It Takes Two may not be a large open-world RPG, it is still easily one of the best games to play, especially with another person. Complete courses and challenges together in this adventure, free-to-play if you are subscribed to PlayStation Plus. It Takes Two is the perfect game to play with a friend if you have PlayStation Plus. 4. Horizon Forbidden West The popular sequel to Horizon Zero Dawn, Horizon Forbidden West, is a wild adventure taking place in a far-off future, where humans have become primitive again, and machines are the enemy. This beautiful open-world adventure is perfect for anyone who has PlayStation Plus. Subscribed to PlayStation Plus? Then you need to download Horizon Forbidden West now. Related: PlayStation Plus Game Catalog Gets GTA 5 and 18 More Games in December 3. Far Cry 6 If you have ever played a Far Cry game before, you know how fun the open-world titles can be. With a unique antagonist, great weapon system and more, Far Cry 6 is the perfect game to play if you are subscribed to PlayStation Plus. Far Cry 6 is not only the most recent installment in the Far Cry series, but it is one of the best games available to play on PlayStation Plus. 2. Ghost of Tsushima Ghost of Tsushima is a huge game to have available to play for free. This massive RPG puts players in the heart of Japan during the Mongol invasion. The unique fighting styles and gameplay are what makes this beautiful game a masterpiece. Ghost of Tsushima is an adventure like no other and needs to be played by everyone who is subscribed to PlayStation Plus. 1. Marvel’s Spider-Man: Miles Morales Swing around New York in Marvel’s Spider-Man: Miles Morales, which is free-to-play for those who are subscribed to PlayStation Plus. Yes, one of the best Spider-Man titles is literally free. This game has it all, from unique web-swinging mechanics to intense fight scenes. Marvel’s Spider-Man: Miles Morales is the best game currently available on PlayStation Plus. Related: Spider-Man 2 New Game+ Announced For Early 2024 TAGS PLAYSTATIONPS5 SHARE TWEET PIN TRENDING POSTS IS HELLDIVERS 2 COMING TO XBOX? – ANSWERED EXCLUSIVE – DETAILS ON ASSASSIN’S CREED RED’S ENGINE, BASE BUILDING, COMBAT, AND MORE EXCLUSIVE – DETAILS ON PROJECT OVER – THE NEXT