Live Demo Pricing Solutions Kitaboo Readers Kitaboo SDK Resources Request A Demo eBooks vs. Printed Books: Which is Better? [2024] By Mike Harman | Blog, Digital Publishing, eBook solution, Education Technology | 0 comment | 8 March, 2024 | 36 Whether eBooks are better than printed books has been a long-standing debate. Though eBooks today have become the mainstay of the publishing industry, they have not completely overtaken print as predicted by analysts. While there may be several advantages of going digital, some people find reading online daunting. Plus, there have also been some signs of eBook readers switching back to print. So which option should you pick? Let’s take a look at eBooks vs. printed books and compare the critical factors that make people choose one over the other. eBooks vs. Printed Traditional Books: A Comparative Analysis Portability One of the primary reasons behind the popularity of eBooks is their portability. Unlike printed books, eBooks are lightweight and easy to carry. You can carry an entire library of thousands of books in a single device. The books are easy to access too. All you need is a good internet connection, and you can download any book you like within minutes. You can carry them anywhere and even enjoy reading on the go, as long as you keep your device charged. On the other hand, you can carry only a handful of printed books at one time. However, since printed books require no power, you won’t have to worry about charging them time and again. Useful Features Supporters of print books argue that it’s much easier to work around printed books. You can easily dog-ear pages, highlight passages, or write notes. It is also easier to keep track of pages in physical books since they never change. Besides, some people feel that the ability to hold books or turn pages with fingers provides a more fulfilling reading experience. However, with the advancement of technology, many features have been introduced into eBooks to provide users with a wholesome reading experience. You can now add bookmarks, highlights, and notes to digital books as well. Plus, many eBooks have an inbuilt dictionary so you can quickly look up difficult words without getting distracted. Not to forget the search feature that enables you to track a single word or phrase from thousands of pages. Such functionalities make eBooks better suited for the fast-paced modern world. Availability Have you ever heard of an eBook going out of stock? No! because they never do. Also, there is no waiting time when you buy eBooks. This is in contrast to printed books, where the timeline from buying books online to getting them delivered and finally being able to read them is often long and tenacious. With eBooks, on the other hand, you can download and read them as soon as you purchase them. You can also print eTextbooks if you want to keep a hard copy of the same. Customizability Printed books have a set layout that cannot be altered. But the same is not the case with eBooks. You can change the font size and line spacing and adjust the format from landscape to portrait or vice versa. Some eBooks even allow you to change the font style and color instead of sticking to the default format. This flowable quality of eBooks is another reason behind the massive surge in their sale. Ease of Learning There are certain situations where eBooks can outperform printed books in ease of learning. For instance, visually challenged readers or people with dyslexia and other learning difficulties can benefit from the interactive features eBooks provide. They can magnify the font and set the layout that is comfortable for them. Ebooks are also easier to integrate with audio. With the new read-aloud features in most eBooks, you can listen to written words and complete a book even while doing other chores. However, not everyone is tech-savvy. Some people might find the features of eBooks difficult to use and prefer the simplicity that printed books provide. This is usually the case with the older generation. Even with youngsters, the potential distractions of links and advertisements in eBooks may affect their learning. Eye-Strain Ebooks do not support prolonged reading as spending too much time on screen can easily strain your eyes. So reading a book on a digital device requires you to take frequent breaks. Even with the anti-glare technology, you can still experience visual fatigue after long reading sessions. The same is never the issue with printed books. If you have good lighting, you can read printed books as long as you like without harming your eyes. Impact on the Environment On the surface, eBooks seem more environment-friendly than printed books. However, the analysis is much more complicated. The environmental impact of printed books vs. eBooks depends greatly on your reading habits. eReaders consume more carbon to produce than printed books. So buying an eReader will only make environmental sense if you are an avid reader. Also, they are difficult to recycle. If you prefer physical books, you can go for used textbooks or borrow one from a library to reduce your carbon footprint. Besides, you can easily recycle printed books when they reach the end of their life. Cost You can generally get eBooks a lot cheaper than physical books since no printing cost is associated with them. So if you prefer purchasing books rather than borrowing, you could save a lot of money by going digital. eReaders can also get access to many free eBooks available online. However, you initially have to invest in a good reading gadget to access all the eBooks. Shareability Sharing books with family and friends is much easier with printed books. You can physically hand them over once you’re finished reading. Some people even sell used books or donate them to the library. This way, more than one person can benefit from a single purchase. However, with eBooks purchased online, the usage is generally restricted to only one account. So you may miss the joy of sharing your favorite books with your loved ones. Conclusion Both eBooks and printed books have their pros and cons, though eBooks can be more convenient in many respects. So the ultimate verdict of which option is better depends on the personal preference of each individual. If you’re unsure, why don’t you give eBooks a try and decide if it suits you better? The best-selling Speech-to-Print eBook from author Louisa Cook Moats would be a great book to start your digital journey. Contact our expert team now and get started! To know more, write to us at kitaboo@hurix.com Suggested Reads: 11 Best Apps to Read PDF Books on Android Devices Online Education vs Traditional Education – Which One is Better? 10 Advantages of eBooks Over Printed Books for Better Reading How to Measure Training Effectiveness and Impact Top 4 eBook to Audiobook Converters Available Right Now Best-in-Class eBook Reader Apps for K-12 Publishers DISCOVER HOW A MOBILE-FIRST INTERACTIVE LEARNING SOLUTION CAN HELP YOUR ORGANIZATION Kitaboo is a cloud-based platform to create, deliver & track mobile-first interactive training content. REQUEST DEMO READ MORE You May Also Like BEST ONLINE LEARNING PLATFORMS FOR EMPLOYEES Employee Training / August 4, 2020 EMPLOYEE TRAINING PLATFORM: 8 BEST FEATURES OF AN EMPLOYEE TRAINING PLATFORM Employee Training / August 11, 2020 CAN TRAINING CONTENT DELIVERY PLATFORMS ENHANCE EMPLOYEE ENGAGEMENT? Employee Training / June 11, 2019 buy ebook, eBook, printed book Mike Harman Mike is the SVP Business Development at HurixDigital. He has over 30 years experience in achieving consistent top-line revenue growth and building mutually beneficial relationships More posts by Mike Harman More Resources Whitepapers How To Guides Product Videos Infographics Kitaboo FAQs Request a Demo An enterprise platform that 15 million users trust Follow Us Kitaboo Product Video Recent Posts 28 March, 2024 0 Books Go Digital: The Global Publishing Industry’s Transformation 28 March, 2024 0 Advanced eBook Creator Software: Design, Publish, and Thrive 28 March, 2024 0 Elevating Training Content with Video: A How-To Guide 28 March, 2024 0 Secure Your eBooks: Advanced Digital Rights Management Solutions Categories BLOG DIGITAL PUBLISHING EBOOK SOLUTION ECOMMERCE EDUCATION TECHNOLOGY EMPLOYEE TRAINING EPUB CONVERSION FRANKFUTER BUCHMESSE NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS & ASSOCIATIONS SDK SELF-PUBLISHING UNCATEGORIZED XML CONVERSION Get the latest posts delivered right to your email. Sign up to Newsletter Press & media Press Releases News Section Events Infographics Quick links About us About Hurix Systems KITABOO for K12 Publishers KITABOO for Associations and Non-profit KITABOO for Higher Education Publishers Digital Content Solutions – HurixDigital Contact Us Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy Cookie Policy Careers Resources Links How To Guides Blog Product videos Kitaboo Partner Program Kitaboo Reader Copyright © 2024 KITABOO - The Digital Textbook Platform. | All Rights Reserved