Books Authors & Illustrators Articles About Us Home Articles General Must reads: 50 best books of all time by Stella Moore 01/03/2024 9 minutes to read Must reads: 50 best books of all time Our edit of the best books to read is the perfect literary bucket list. From prize-winners to controversial classics that got everyone talking – these are must read books before you die. So many books, so little time. Many book lovers know the temptation of buying a beautiful new hardback, but what are the essential must reads? Spanning all genres and periods, our edit of the best books to read before you die is here to help. Literary fiction books Classic books Sci-fi and fantasy books Non-fiction books Crime and thriller books Historical fiction books Books in translation Dystopian books Literary books to read before you die Shuggie Bain by Douglas Stuart Buy the book Amazon Blackwell's Bookshop.org Foyles Waterstones WH Smith Wordery Set in a poverty-stricken Glasgow in the early 1980s, Douglas Stuart’s Booker Prize-winning debut is a heartbreaking story which lays bare the ruthlessness of poverty and the limits of love. Agnes Bain has always dreamed of greater things, but when her husband abandons her she finds herself trapped in a decimated mining town with her three children, and descends deeper and deeper into drink. Her son Shuggie tries to help Agnes long after her other children have fled, but he too must abandon her to save himself. Shuggie is different, and he is picked on by the local children and condemned by adults. But he believes that if he tries his hardest he can escape this hopeless place. White Noise by Don DeLillo Buy the book Amazon Blackwell's Bookshop.org Foyles Waterstones WH Smith Wordery Jack Gladney is the creator and chairman of Hitler studies at the College-on-the-Hill. This is the story of his absurd life; a life that is going well enough, until a chemical spill from a train carriage releases an ‘Airborne Toxic Event’ and Jack is forced to confront his biggest fear – his own mortality. The combination of social satire and metaphysical dilemma that Don DeLillo uses to expose our rampant consumerism and media saturation makes White Noise an unmissable work of modern fiction. American Psycho by Bret Easton Ellis Buy the book Amazon Blackwell's Bookshop.org Foyles Waterstones WH Smith Wordery One of the most controversial and talked-about novels in modern history, American Psycho is the story of Patrick Bateman, a New York City high-flier with a penchant for fine wines, slickly cut suits and brutal murder. As Bateman's obsession with his hedonistic passions comes to a head, he descends into madness, with macabre and darkly comedic repercussions. Read more about the controversial history of American Psycho. Blood Meridian by Cormac McCarthy Buy the book Amazon Blackwell's Bookshop.org Foyles Waterstones WH Smith Wordery Written in 1985, Blood Meridian is set in the anarchic world opened up by America’s westward expansion. Through the hostile landscape of the Texas–Mexico border wanders the Kid, a fourteen year-old Tennessean who is quickly swept up in the relentless tide of blood. But the apparent chaos is not without its order: while Americans hunt Indians – collecting scalps as their bloody trophies – they too are stalked as prey. Powerful, mesmerizing and savagely beautiful, Blood Meridian is considered one of the most important works in American fiction of the last century. The Line of Beauty by Alan Hollinghurst Buy the book Amazon Blackwell's Bookshop.org Foyles Waterstones WH Smith Wordery This Booker Prize-winning novel bottles the essence of the 1980s, as the story follows a quest for beauty against a backdrop of politics, greed and friendships turned toxic. When twenty-year-old Nick Guest moves into an attic room in the Notting Hill home of the wealthy Feddens he is innocent of politics and money. But as he is swept up into the Feddens’ world, Nick must confront the collisions between his own desires, and a world he can never truly belong to. Alan Hollinghurst’s writing style is both stripped back and poetic, and its sensitivity makes this book a true standout. A Little Life by Hanya Yanagihara Buy the book Amazon Blackwell's Bookshop.org Foyles Waterstones WH Smith Wordery Shortlisted for the Booker Prize and celebrated as ‘the great gay novel’, Hanya Yanagihara’s immensely powerful story of brotherly love and the limits of human endurance has had a visceral impact on many a reader. Willem, Jude, Malcolm and JB meet at college in Massachusetts and form a firm friendship, moving to New York upon graduation. Over the years their friendships deepen and darken as they celebrate successes and face failures, but their greatest challenge is Jude himself – an increasingly broken man scarred by an unspeakable childhood. This is a book that will stay with you long after the last page. Americanah by Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie Buy the book Amazon Blackwell's Bookshop.org Foyles Waterstones WH Smith Wordery Ifemelu and Obinze are young and in love. But when they both depart military-ruled Nigeria for the West, they are divided – Ifemelu heads for America, while Obinze plunges into a dangerous, undocumented life in London. It takes fifteen years for them to be reunited again in a newly democratic Nigeria where their passion for their homeland – and each other – can finally blossom. A fearless, gripping novel that spans three continents and numerous lives, Americanah is a must-read story of love and expectation set in a modern globalized world. The God of Small Things by Arundhati Roy Buy the book Amazon Blackwell's Bookshop.org Foyles Waterstones WH Smith Wordery This Booker Prize-winning novel and 1990s literary sensation follows fraternal twins, Rahel and Estha, in the state of Kerala, India in 1969. Armed only with the invincible innocence of children, they fashion a childhood for themselves in the shade of the wreck that is their family. But when their English cousin and her mother arrive for a Christmas visit, the twins learn that things can change in a day. Covering themes of love, madness and hope, this story uncoils with an agonizing sense of foreboding and inevitability. Yet, readers will not be prepared for what lies at the heart of it. DON'T MISS The best literary fiction to read right now Read more Classic books to read before you die Pride and Prejudice by Jane Austen Buy the book Amazon Blackwell's Bookshop.org Foyles Waterstones WH Smith Wordery Named one of BBC's 100 Novels That Shaped Our World, a copy of Pride and Prejudice is a worthy addition to any bookshelf. The story shows how the headstrong Elizabeth Bennet and the aristocratic Mr Darcy must have their pride humbled and their prejudices dissolved before they can acknowledge their love for each other. Jane Austen serves up laughs, romance, sharp observations, life lessons and characters that still feel vividly alive today. A universally acknowledged classic. The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes by Arthur Conan Doyle Buy the book Amazon Blackwell's Bookshop.org Foyles Waterstones WH Smith Wordery The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes is perhaps the greatest collection of detective stories ever written. From his residence at 221B Baker Street, Sherlock Holmes solves a series of baffling and bizarre cases, including those of a man terrified by the arrival of an envelope containing orange pips, and a woman whose fiancé disappeared on his way to their wedding. Each story showcases the great detective's inimitable and extraordinary deductive powers, recounted to us by his faithful friend and colleague, Dr Watson. Don Quixote by Miguel de Cervantes Buy the book Amazon Blackwell's Bookshop.org Foyles Waterstones WH Smith Wordery Cervantes’s satirical observation of the human condition is classed as Europe’s first ‘modern’ novel and has sold over 500 million copies since it was first published in the early seventeenth-century. It follows Don Quixote and Sancho Panza – one of the original comedy duos – as they journey through sixteenth-century Spain in search of adventure. They face spirits, evil enchanters and giants in a quest to perform acts of valour worthy of Dulcinea, his lady love. Cervantes's words have made an impact across the globe with the book celebrating its 400th anniversary in 2005. David Copperfield by Charles Dickens Buy the book Amazon Blackwell's Bookshop.org Foyles Waterstones WH Smith Wordery Partly modelled on Dickens’s own experiences, David Copperfield follows the eponymous hero from childhood struggles to a successful career as a novelist. Dickens' early scenes are particularly masterful, depicting the world as seen from the perspective of a fatherless small boy. David's idyllic life with his mother is then ruined when she marries again, this time to a domineering and cruel man. The great joy of this book lies in the outlandish cast of characters that Dickens vividly portrays in ways that will make you both laugh and cry. Dickens described David Copperfield as his ‘favourite child’ – and it is easy to see why. Wuthering Heights by Emily Bronte Buy the book Amazon Blackwell's Bookshop.org Foyles Waterstones WH Smith Wordery A dark, haunting tale of passionate and destructive love, Wuthering Heights is one of the great romantic novels of the nineteenth century. Cathy and Heathcliff form an intense bond, but despite their love Cathy marries a rich suitor. But neither can forget the other, and while Cathy becomes increasingly unhappy, Heathcliff is driven by a lust for revenge that will echo through generations. Set against the backdrop of the Yorkshire moors, this is a dark novel with complicated characters who will hover doggedly in your thoughts long after the final page. The Great Gatsby by F. Scott Fitzgerald Buy the book Amazon Blackwell's Bookshop.org Foyles Waterstones WH Smith Wordery Despite selling less than 20,000 copies in the first year of its publication, The Great Gatsby is now established as a literary classic. Gatsby lives mysteriously in a luxurious Long Island mansion, playing lavish host to hundreds of people. And yet no one seems to know him or how he became so rich. But Gatsby cares for one person alone – Daisy Buchanan. Little does he know that his infatuation will lead to tragedy and end in murder. A glittering but cynical portrait of the American Dream that beautifully captures the flamboyance and cruelty of America's Jazz Age, it is no wonder Fitzgerald’s novel has been adapted so many times. Middlemarch by George Eliot Buy the book Amazon Blackwell's Bookshop.org Foyles Waterstones WH Smith Wordery A masterpiece of candid observation, emotional insight and transcending humour, Middlemarch is a truly monumental novel. Dorothea Brooke is a young woman set on filling her life with good deeds. She pursues the pompous Edward Casuabon, convinced that he embodies these principles, and becomes trapped in an unhappy marriage. Then there is Tertius Lydgate, an anguished progressive whose determination to bring modern medicine to the provinces is muddied by unrequited love. One of BBC's 100 Novels That Shaped Our World, Middlemarch explores almost every subject of concern to modern life and so remains as culturally relevant today as it has ever been. Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass by Frederick Douglass Buy the book Amazon Blackwell's Bookshop.org Foyles Waterstones WH Smith Wordery Portraying a key moment in the anti-slavery movement, this unique memoir tells the incredible story of a man's escape from enslavement and journey to freedom. Maryland, 1818. Frederick Douglass is born into a life of slavery. Spending his youth being passed from enslaver to enslaver, city to field, he is subjected to unimaginable cruelty. After eventually managing to escape, his memoir became hugely influential in the abolition of slavery, a goal that Douglass devoted his live to. In doing so, he has become one of the most celebrated political theorists in the world. DON'T MISS Classic books to read at least once in your lifetime Read more Sci-fi and fantasy books to read before you die Children of Time by Adrian Tchaikovsky Buy the book Amazon Blackwell's Bookshop.org Foyles Waterstones WH Smith Wordery Adrian Tchaikovksy's critically acclaimed novel Children of Time, is the epic story of humanity's battle for survival on a terraformed planet. Who will inherit this new Earth? The last remnants of the human race left a dying Earth, desperate to find a new home among the stars. Following in the footsteps of their ancestors, they discover the greatest treasure of the past age – a world terraformed and