What's the Tomatometer?® RT Critics CANCEL MOVIES TV SHOWS NEWS TICKETS & SHOWTIMES TRENDING ON RT Godzilla X Kong: The New Empire 3 Body Problem Winnie-the-Pooh: Blood and Honey 2 Play Movie Trivia Home TV & Streaming Shows Godzilla & Kong 100 Years, 100 Movies Best & Popular TAGGED AS: BLOCKBUSTERS, MOVIES, POPULAR 30 MOST POPULAR MOVIES RIGHT NOW: WHAT TO WATCH IN THEATERS AND STREAMING Discover the top, most popular movies available now! Across theaters, streaming, and on-demand, these are the movies Rotten Tomatoes users are checking out at this very moment, including Ghostubusters: Frozen Empire (see the series ranked), Road House, and Late Night With the Devil (currently the best-reviewed horror movie of the year). Check back for latest updates to the charts, and also take a look at the most popular TV shows out right now!) GHOSTBUSTERS: FROZEN EMPIRE (2024) 43% #1 Critics Consensus: Ghostbusters: Frozen Empire offers a certain amount of nostalgia-fueled fun for fans of the original, but a crowded cast and surprisingly serious tone prevent this sequel from truly sparking. Synopsis: In Ghostbusters: Frozen Empire, the Spengler family returns to where it all started -- the iconic New York City firehouse... [More] Starring: Paul Rudd, Carrie Coon, Finn Wolfhard, Mckenna Grace Directed By: Gil Kenan ROAD HOUSE (2024) 60% #2 Critics Consensus: Road House updates a cult classic for a new generation, happily replicating the original's emphasis on cheesy brawn over narrative brains. Synopsis: In this adrenaline-fueled reimagining of the 80s cult classic, ex-UFC fighter Dalton (Jake Gyllenhaal) takes a job as a bouncer... [More] Starring: Jake Gyllenhaal, Daniela Melchior, Billy Magnussen, Jessica Williams Directed By: Doug Liman LATE NIGHT WITH THE DEVIL (2023) 96% #3 Critics Consensus: Delightfully dark, Late Night with the Devil proves possession horror isn't played out -- and serves as an outstanding showcase for David Dastmalchian. Synopsis: Johnny Carson rival Jack Delroy hosts a syndicated talk show 'Night Owls' that has long been a trusted companion to... [More] Starring: David Dastmalchian, Laura Gordon, Fayssal Bazzi, Ian Bliss Directed By: Colin Cairnes, Cameron Cairnes IMMACULATE (2024) 71% #4 Critics Consensus: Immaculate in conception if not always in execution, this religiously themed horror outing is saved by a divine performance from Sydney Sweeney. Synopsis: Sydney Sweeney (Anyone But You, Euphoria, The White Lotus) stars as Cecilia, an American nun of devout faith, embarking on... [More] Starring: Sydney Sweeney, Álvaro Morte, Benedetta Porcaroli, Simona Tabasco Directed By: Michael Mohan DUNE: PART TWO (2024) 93% #5 Critics Consensus: Visually thrilling and narratively epic, Dune: Part Two continues Denis Villeneuve's adaptation of the beloved sci-fi series in spectacular form. Synopsis: "Dune: Part Two" will explore the mythic journey of Paul Atreides as he unites with Chani and the Fremen while... [More] Starring: Timothée Chalamet, Zendaya, Rebecca Ferguson, Javier Bardem Directed By: Denis Villeneuve POOR THINGS (2023) 92% #6 Critics Consensus: Wildly imaginative and exhilaratingly over the top, Poor Things is a bizarre, brilliant tour de force for director Yorgos Lanthimos and star Emma Stone. Synopsis: From filmmaker Yorgos Lanthimos and producer Emma Stone comes the incredible tale and fantastical evolution of Bella Baxter (Stone), a... [More] Starring: Emma Stone, Willem Dafoe, Mark Ruffalo, Christopher Abbott Directed By: Yorgos Lanthimos KUNG FU PANDA 4 (2024) 72% #7 Critics Consensus: Kung Fu Panda 4 offers enough eye-catching entertainment to sustain the franchise's young fans, although it's starting to feel like this series is running out of steam. Synopsis: After three death-defying adventures defeating world-class villains with his unmatched courage and mad martial arts skills, Po, the Dragon Warrior... [More] Starring: Jack Black, Awkwafina, Viola Davis, Dustin Hoffman Directed By: Mike Mitchell DAMSEL (2024) 56% #8 Critics Consensus: Damsel has an appealing action hero in Millie Bobby Brown, whose gutsy performance is often enough to balance the scales against the film's underpowered story and occasionally unconvincing effects. Synopsis: A dutiful damsel agrees to marry a handsome prince, only to find the royal family has recruited her as a... [More] Starring: Millie Bobby Brown, Ray Winstone, Nick Robinson, Shohreh Aghdashloo Directed By: Juan Carlos Fresnadillo LOVE LIES BLEEDING (2024) 93% #9 Critics Consensus: Lust and violence collide to powerfully pulpy effect in Love Lies Bleeding, a well-acted addition to writer-director Rose Glass' growing body of exceptional work. Synopsis: From Director Rose Glass comes an electric new love story; reclusive gym manager Lou falls hard for Jackie, an ambitious... [More] Starring: Kristen Stewart, Katy M. O'Brian, Ed Harris, Jena Malone Directed By: Rose Glass MADAME WEB (2024) 12% #10 Critics Consensus: Madame Web's earnest approach to the title character's origin story has a certain appeal, but its predictable plot and uneven execution make for a forgettable superhero adventure. Synopsis: In a switch from the typical genre, Madame Web tells the standalone origin story of one of Marvel publishing's most... [More] Starring: Dakota Johnson, Sydney Sweeney, Celeste O'Connor, Isabela Merced Directed By: S.J. Clarkson THE AMERICAN SOCIETY OF MAGICAL NEGROES (2024) 29% #11 Critics Consensus: The American Society of Magical Negroes has a promising premise, but is too timid to fully engage with its most provocative ideas. Synopsis: THE AMERICAN SOCIETY OF MAGICAL NEGROES is a fresh, satirical comedy inspired by the "magical negro" cinematic trope popularized in... [More] Starring: Justice Smith, David Alan Grier, An-Li Bogan, Drew Tarver Directed By: Kobi Libii DREAM SCENARIO (2023) 91% #12 Critics Consensus: Come to Dream Scenario for career-highlight work from Nicolas Cage -- and leave mulling over everything it has to say about pop culture's fickle whims. Synopsis: Hapless family man Paul Matthews (Nicolas Cage) finds his life turned upside down when millions of strangers suddenly start seeing... [More] Starring: Nicolas Cage, Lily Bird, Julianne Nicholson, Jessica Clement Directed By: Kristoffer Borgli ANATOMY OF A FALL (2023) 96% #13 Critics Consensus: A smart, solidly crafted procedural that's anchored in family drama, Anatomy of a Fall finds star Sandra Hüller and director/co-writer Justine Triet operating at peak power. Synopsis: For the past year, Sandra, her husband Samuel, and their eleven-year-old son Daniel have lived a secluded life in a... [More] Starring: Sandra Hüller, Swann Arlaud, Milo Machado Graner, Antoine Reinartz Directed By: Justine Triet THE ZONE OF INTEREST (2023) 93% #14 Critics Consensus: Dispassionately examining the ordinary existence of people complicit in horrific crimes, The Zone of Interest forces us to take a cold look at the mundanity behind an unforgivable brutality. Synopsis: The commandant of Auschwitz, Rudolf Höss, and his wife Hedwig, strive to build a dream life for their family in... [More] Starring: Christian Friedel, Sandra Hüller, Medusa Knopf, Daniel Holzberg Directed By: Jonathan Glazer ARTHUR THE KING (2024) 68% #15 Critics Consensus: It's hard to deny Arthur the King's ability to tug at the heartstrings, although it may have been more effective if it had taken a subtler approach. Synopsis: Over the course of ten days and 435 miles, an unbreakable bond is forged between pro adventure racer Michael Light... [More] Starring: Mark Wahlberg, Nathalie Emmanuel, Simu Liu, Paul Guilfoyle Directed By: Simon Cellan Jones THE GENTLEMEN (2019) 75% #16 Critics Consensus: It may not win writer-director Guy Ritchie many new converts, but for those already attuned to the filmmaker's brash wavelength, The Gentlemen stands tall. Synopsis: Mickey Pearson is an American expatriate who became rich by building a highly profitable marijuana empire in London. When word... [More] Starring: Matthew McConaughey, Charlie Hunnam, Michelle Dockery, Jeremy Strong Directed By: Guy Ritchie GHOSTBUSTERS: AFTERLIFE (2021) 64% #17 Critics Consensus: Ghostbusters: Afterlife crosses the streams between franchise revival and exercise in nostalgia -- and this time around, the bustin' mostly feels good. Synopsis: In Ghostbusters: Afterlife, when a single mom and her two kids arrive in a small town, they begin to discover... [More] Starring: Carrie Coon, Finn Wolfhard, Mckenna Grace, Paul Rudd Directed By: Jason Reitman BOB MARLEY: ONE LOVE (2024) 43% #18 Critics Consensus: Kingsley Ben-Adir does an admirable job in the central role, but Bob Marley: One Love is ultimately a standard biopic that doesn't do justice to its brilliant subject. Synopsis: BOB MARLEY: ONE LOVE celebrates the life and music of an icon who inspired generations through his message of love... [More] Starring: Kingsley Ben-Adir, Lashana Lynch, James Norton, Tosin Cole Directed By: Reinaldo Marcus Green RICKY STANICKY (2024) 47% #19 Critics Consensus: Ricky Stanicky gets some big laughs thanks to John Cena's up-for-anything performance, but they aren't enough to support the movie's thin plot and excessive runtime. Synopsis: When three childhood best friends pull a prank gone wrong, they invent the imaginary Ricky Stanicky to get them out... [More] Starring: Zac Efron, Jermaine Fowler, Andrew Santino, Lex Scott Davis Directed By: Peter Farrelly PROBLEMISTA (2023) 89% #20 Critics Consensus: With Problemista, Julio Torres' utterly unique sensibilities prove a perfectly cracked lens through which to find the surreal humor in bleak aspects of the human experience. Synopsis: Alejandro (Julio Torres) is an aspiring toy designer from El Salvador, struggling to bring his unusual ideas to life in... [More] Starring: Julio Torres, Tilda Swinton, RZA, Isabella Rossellini Directed By: Julio Torres YOU'LL NEVER FIND ME (2023) 85% #21 Critics Consensus: Visually and sonically distinctive, You'll Never Find Me heightens its spooky atmosphere and claustrophobic setting with a story that'll keep viewers guessing. Synopsis: An isolated man living at the back of a desolate caravan park is visited by a desperate young woman seeking... [More] Starring: Brendan Rock, Jordan Cowan, Elena Carapetis, Angela Korng Directed By: Josiah Allen, Indianna Bell CABRINI (2024) 91% #22 Critics Consensus: Aided by Cristiana Dell'Anna's performance in the title role, Cabrini is an uplifting biopic with a timeless message. Synopsis: From Alejandro Monteverde, award-winning director of "Sound of Freedom", comes the powerful epic of Francesca Cabrini, an Italian immigrant who... [More] Starring: Cristiana Dell'Anna, Romana Maggiora Vergano, David Morse, Giancarlo Giannini Directed By: Alejandro Monteverde IRISH WISH (2024) 39% #23 Critics Consensus: With Lindsay Lohan in the lead, it almost doesn't matter that Irish Wish is a scattered collection of rom-com clichés. Synopsis: When the love of her life gets engaged to her best friend, Maddie (Lindsay Lohan) puts her feelings aside to... [More] Starring: Lindsay Lohan, Ed Speleers, Ayesha Curry, Alexander Vlahos Directed By: Janeen Damian WONKA (2023) 82% #24 Critics Consensus: With director Paul King at the helm and some solid new songs at the ready, the warmly old-fashioned Wonka puts a suitably sweet spin on the classic character while still leaving some room for the source material's darker undertones. Synopsis: Based on the extraordinary character at the center of Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, Roald Dahl’s most iconic children's book... [More] Starring: Timothée Chalamet, Hugh Grant, Calah Lane, Keegan-Michael Key Directed By: Paul King DUNE (2021) 83% #25 Critics Consensus: Dune occasionally struggles with its unwieldy source material, but those issues are largely overshadowed by the scope and ambition of this visually thrilling adaptation. Synopsis: Paul Atreides, a brilliant and gifted young man born into a great destiny beyond his understanding, must travel to the... [More] Starring: Timothée Chalamet, Rebecca Ferguson, Oscar Isaac, Josh Brolin Directed By: Denis Villeneuve INSIDE THE YELLOW COCOON SHELL (2023) 98% #26 Critics Consensus: Following its own alluringly inscrutable path between past, present, reality, and dreams, Inside the Yellow Cocoon Shell rewards patient viewers with an absorbing spiritual odyssey. Synopsis: Winner of the prestigious Camera d’Or for best first film at this year's Cannes Film Festival, the enthralling Inside the... [More] Starring: Le Phong Vu, Nguyen Thi Truc Quynh, Nguyen Thinh, Vu Ngoc Manh Directed By: Pham Thien An AMERICAN FICTION (2023) 93% #27 Critics Consensus: Jeffrey Wright and American Fiction will forever be inextricable thanks to the actor's committed approach to the pointedly humorous and insightful material. Synopsis: AMERICAN FICTION is Cord Jefferson's hilarious directorial debut, which confronts our culture's obsession with reducing people to outrageous stereotypes. Jeffrey... [More] Starring: Jeffrey Wright, Tracee Ellis Ross, John Ortiz, Erika Alexander Directed By: Cord Jefferson SPACEMAN (2024) 50% #28 Critics Consensus: Spaceman's poignant themes are partly brought to life by sensitive performances from a talented cast, but it fails to consistently engage with its most interesting ideas. Synopsis: Six months into a solitary research mission to the edge of the solar system, an astronaut, Jakub (Adam Sandler), realizes... [More] Starring: Adam Sandler, Carey Mulligan, Kunal Nayyar, Isabella Rossellini Directed By: Johan Renck LAND OF BAD (2024)