Library Staff Student A-Z lists Search Using the Library Finding information E-resources Databases A-Z Databases by subject Accessing e resources E-books E-journals Encyclopedias and dictionaries Video image and sound resources Digital maps and geographical data The web Keeping up to date Contacts and support Training & Events About us Inter-library loans and other libraries Maths Support Study Advice Research Engagement Special Collections E-books E-books are usually online versions of existing printed book titles, though very occasionally they only exist electronically. University members can access online titles to which the Library subscribes, and there are also some collections of freely available e-books. Find out about our recent e-book acquisitions via the New e-books list. In addition, the Library has a number of online dictionaries, encyclopedias and other reference sources, useful for starting projects and essays. Finding e-books Search the Enterprise catalogue - to find specific books or books on a topic. When looking at your results, use the limits on the left of the screen to select "Online". If your results include a number of journals use the "Book" format limit to exclude these. To access a book look for the text 'Click here for online access' link under the title Search Summon - to find online book chapters When looking at your results, use the limits on the left of the screen to select "E-book" as the publication type. E-book services we subscribe to - links to our major suppliers and collections of e-books Free e-book collections Accessing e-books To access most of our e-books you will need to login with your University username and password (the same one you use to login to Blackboard or to the computers on campus). Just follow the links from the Enterprise catalogue, Summon, or from our website for the easiest access. Printing / Saving from e-books For legal reasons, it is not usually possible to print or save more than a chapter of a title which is still in copyright. See our Guide to using e-books for more information. Help using e-books For more help see our Guide to using e-books, which includes tips on printing and downloading. Alternatively, contact your Academic Liaison Librarian. Charitable status Accessibility Privacy policy Cookies Disclaimer Sitemap Contact us Find us