Our Services About Us Hire Us Call Center Data Processing Photo Editing Graphic Design Video Editing 3D Designs Digital Publishing Top 10 Advantages of eBooks over Printed Books eBook vs. physical book! The battle is real. But there will always be digital supremacy now that the world is moving towards everything digital. With digital transformation influencing for many sectors, including- Education (eLearning) Publication eCommerce Corporate Fashion Healthcare, etc., – the production of digital books or eBooks has skyrocketed like never before. So, the question remains, which has the most advantages and must be adopted the most? Well, one does agree or not, eBooks seem to be winning this fight. This article will cover all the useful advantages of eBooks over printed books and the reasons why publishers and readers favor them. Hopefully, by the end of the article, you will gain the knowledge to choose between the two formats, online and printed. Let’s start! Top 10 reasons why eBooks are better than traditional printed paper books A lot of debates and speculations happen over the adaption and acceptance of eBooks over traditional paperback. As books are our best friends, if they can are converted into digital facsimiles with similar appeal but enhanced features, it adds further value. Let’s examine the significant benefits of eBooks over traditional printed books. Accessible anywhere, anytime The beauty of eBooks is that they can be stored and downloaded for later use as often as possible, regardless of geographical barriers. No matter the content you need, just go to the respective site or digital shelf and download the specific file. Even for rare books that are difficult to find in physical bookstores, one can find a digital replica online. Traditional books often go out of stock or are lost during delivery, electronic books can be accessed anywhere, anytime. In short, these online content materials have opened newer opportunities for aspiring readers. Conveniently portable Another best aspect of eBooks is portability. No more space crunch or heavier luggage due to bulky hardcovers; just take your iPad or Kindle, download the softcopy, and start reading on the go. There’s no time limit for users accessing the sites, unlike physical bookstores or libraries, which have a definite time limit for access. Takes care of the eyes Most eReaders these days have useful features such as the option to read in the dark with warm eye protection lights and layout-changing options. These features are easy on the eyes and don’t hurt or damage them even with continuous exposure. Also, brightness adjustment is another great feature eBooks have. Besides, eBooks allow the flexibility to increase or decrease the font size and choose a single or double-space reading mode. Simply put, they care more for your eyes than printed books do. Interactive multimedia elements Digitized textbooks can have a lot of multimedia elements embedded in them. Such as audio & video, graphics, illustrations, third-party links, etc. Users can use these hyperlinks for more data. These elements enhance the user experience with enhanced engagement and easy information collection. They contribute to an immersive reading and more engagement. Users can also bookmark and search a certain page instantly, saving a lot of time. In printed books, readers search for an excerpt manually by scrolling several pages. Professional eBook development agencies are experts in creating such interactive eBooks. Easy to highlight and insert comments/notes Readers can highlight their favorite paragraphs or lines and download all at once with a few clicks. With handy comment insertion features, they can also write short notes or comments beside paragraphs or excerpts. These notes are helpful for future reference and citations. These functionalities not only save time but also streamline the reading experience from the start to the end. Text-to-speech or read-aloud feature eBooks have built-in text-to-speech or read-aloud feature. This enables users to listen to the content if they have no time to read it. This also helps users with vision impairments or learning disabilities, such as dyslexia. Furthermore, children with ADHD are helped by this feature, as they have a hard time focusing on or reading something for a long time. Also, getting the right pronunciation or accent of foreign words is also fulfilled. An embedded dictionary to find tough words Electronic books also come with another in-built feature, a dictionary. Users can use this feature anytime they need to find the meaning or definition of an unknown word. Healthcare professionals, researchers, scientists, and students pursuing higher studies are especially helped with this. Because most of them often come across jargon that needs to be defined. All they have to do is click and hold the particular word, and the meaning will pop up. Expert digital conversion service providers embed such functionalities while developing a digital book. Ability to share content Online books can be shared with and developed by multiple contributors. They can also be accessed by as many people as the author wants. Apart from this, social sharing is also a major functionality that users can avail themselves of. Authors can embed social media sharing buttons within the content for instant social media sharing. Users can use these buttons to easily share whatever they like. Thus, content shareability is another advantage of eBooks over printed books. Can last longer than conventional books This is probably one of the most critical advantages electronic content has over printed hardcovers. The latter can get ruined due to wear and tear, old age, water and mold damage, pages can break, and so on. But eBooks are online content; hence, they have indefinite longevity. Even rare manuscripts can be transformed into digital books with the help of OCR technology. Professional digital conversion agencies offer such stellar services at a reasonable cost. They also ensure the utmost quality in the final product. eBooks are eco-friendly On average, more than 2 million paperback books are produced each year, leaving over 3.4 million trees to be chopped down over the next decade. On the contrary, not a single page or piece of paper is involved in the entire development of an eBook. Thus, the environmental impact is highly positive in the development of digitized books. Unlike traditional books, which require hundreds of pages for printing. With the digital process, printing is eliminated which reduces production costs. It also drastically reduces the carbon footprint with less raw materials transported. Electricity consumed is also less, which contributes to a lesser carbon footprint. This is another reason why eBooks are outshining printed books. The final verdict – Which is better, printed books or eBooks? There’s an old adage that goes by, “to each their own”. It means every person has their own opinion, preference, and comfort zone. That said, some consumers still prefer printed books over electronic or online formats. Albeit because of sentimental values or old habits. There can be both pros and cons to eBooks. Yet, if one evaluates the practicalities, convenience, and ease of use, digitized books take the cake. Printed formats give the feeling of holding a book, scrolling the pages, bookmarking them, and buying from bookstores. Digital books offer more functionalities, better portability, and a much more cost-effective approach. Also, the world is moving towards a digital world that will have more digitized versions. Besides, the advent of several self-publishing platforms, has helped many independent authors. They can now produce and self-publish their content for mass outreach. With DRM features available for eBooks, their creative authorities are also retained. Parting thoughts It’s time to sum up everything about eBooks vs. printed books. Judging the two great advantages of the former, such as: Portability, and Functionality Interactivity, and User experience – over printed books, eBooks surely win. eBooks have a lot of advantages when compared to hard copy books, such as portability, accessibility, interactivity, shareability, multilanguage support, etc. Other factors to consider are affordability over printing, production, or packaging costs, warehousing, logistics, and shipping expenses. Finally, there are no reprinting costs involved with eBooks. By simply leveraging any of the myriads of eBook conversion software, high-quality eBooks can be produced in no time. To dig deeper, online books also offer AR-friendly reading and, most of all, DRM (Digital Rights Management) features. This empowers authors to exert their creative rights over their content. As well as prevent it from being illegally distributed or modified. If you are a marketer, publisher, or author, reach out to a professional digital conversion agency today. Check out the high-end eBook conversion services they offer and share your requirements. In no time, you will have fully functional eBooks produced for your ultimate business objectives. Give your users the best reading experience they have ever had! Good luck! CONTACT US Top 10 reasons why eBooks are better than traditional printed paper books Accessible anywhere, anytime Conveniently portable Takes care of the eyes Interactive multimedia elements Easy to highlight and insert comments/notes Text-to-speech or read-aloud feature An embedded dictionary to find tough words Ability to share content Can last longer than conventional books eBooks are eco-friendly The final verdict – Which is better, printed books or eBooks? Parting thoughts About the Author: pro-emi June 1st, 2023|Digital Publishing Did You Enjoy Reading This Blog Post? Why Not Share This Story, to Your Social Network! About the Author: pro-emi Related Posts ADA Compliance: How to Increase Your eBook’s Accessibility 6 EdTech Trends Set to Have a Big Impact on Learning 10 eBook Publishing Platforms for Digital Self-Publishing List of 10 Best eBook File Formats for 2024 12 Simple Tips to Write an Effective Children Book FEATURED SERVICES Multilingual Call Center Service Video Editing Services Wedding Photo Post Processing Real Estate Photo Editing Services Product Photo Editing Services 3D Product Modeling Services 3D Furniture Modeling Services eBook Conversion Services QUICK LINKS Careers Blog Resources Portfolio Testimonials Case studies FAQ’s Sitemap About Us Contact Us OFFICE LOCATIONS Bangalore, India Florida, USA England, UK CALL US IN : +91-7406666928 USA : +1-716-817-8547 FOLLOW US The text information and multimedia content on the website is copyright protected. All users or visitors of this portal are not authorized in any way to replicate, change, distribute, and republish the given information without the written permission of ProGlobalBusinessSolutions. Copyright © 2024. All Rights Reserved. | Terms & Conditions | Privacy Policy