Skip to main content Skip to navigation Skip to navigation Print subscriptions Sign in Search jobs Search Europe edition Support the Guardian Fund independent journalism with €10 per month Support us News Opinion Sport Culture Lifestyle More Books Music TV & radio Art & design Film Games Classical Stage Ebooks This article is more than 22 years old Ebooks: a beginner's guide Emma Yates, Guardian Unlimited Books Wed 19 Dec 2001 17.15 CET Share What is an ebook? How do I read an ebook? What are the advantages of ebooks? What are the disadvantages of ebooks? How much do ebooks cost? What added extras do I get? Where can I buy ebooks and try free samples? Can I get my novel published in ebook format? What is the future for ebooks? What is an ebook? An ebook is a text presented in a format which allows it to be read on a computer or handheld device. Many titles which are available in printed versions can be read as ebooks, including bestselling fiction, classics and reference texts. Ebooks are also used to make out-of-print work available, or to bypass print altogether, as with new works by aspiring authors. Ebooks can consist simply of the electronic text or may also contain extras, such as audio, video or hyperlinks. How do I read an ebook? There are currently three ways to read ebooks: a) Portable ebook reading devices These are small hand-held computers that mimic books. They are the size of a paperback, run on battery power and have a back-lit screen. They display texts which have been downloaded from a computer, and allow the reader to search for keywords and to add notes and hyperlinks. b) On your PC or Mac using special software There are two free software packages that can be downloaded from the internet, Adobe Acrobat reader and Microsoft Reader. Adobe Acrobat reader Download here There is a short registration form to fill out, requiring an email address and password. After choosing between Windows and Mac versions, follow the clear on-screen instructions to complete the installation. Download takes between one and two minutes. Once downloaded, different viewing options are offered, and it is possible to highlight text and make your own notes against it. Your library of books is displayed very clearly on your desktop with this software - simply click the title to access the book you want. Microsoft Reader Download here It is necessary to go through an activation process, but a hotmail password can be used to sign in. The on-screen instructions for installation are easy to follow and downloading should take two to three minutes, but it's not as easy as getting the Adobe software. You can, however, store your titles online, thus saving space. c) Handheld computers and personal digital assistants (PDAs) The two free software packages described above are also available for PDAs. What are the advantages of ebooks? · Speed: providing the title you want is available, the book can be downloaded immediately · Portability: a number of books can be carried on one device - ideal for travellers. PDAs are the perfect medium for guidebooks · Print on demand: books need no longer go out of print · Interactivity: readers can also take notes, underline, bookmark pages, search and gain extra information through hyperlinks · Personalisation: the back-lighting and font size can be increased - ideal for the visually impaired · Add-ons: many ebooks have searchable text, dictionaries or other features · Open market: by publishing electronically, writers can bypass the publishing process · Environmentally friendly: paper-free books save trees What are the disadvantages of ebooks? · The number of books available in ebook format is still quite limited · If downloaded on to a computer, ebooks cannot be printed out · Many ebooks are not available in a Mac-friendly format How much does an ebook cost? They are generally cheaper than paperbacks, costing between £2 and £6. There is no delivery charge and, if you're downloading them on to your computer, the software is free. Plans to bring the cost down even further are being considered. What added extras do I get? Non-fiction works have the most potential in terms of extra text, hyperlinks and footnotes. For example, Your Face Here: British Cult Movies Since the Sixties by Ali Catterall and Simon Wells provides hyperlinks to filmographies, additional text setting the featured films in context and added links to other films. Some publishers are also beginning to add extras to their fiction titles, rather in the manner of DVDs compared to videos. The ebook version of Toby Litt's latest novel, deadkidsongs, includes a section that did not appear in the print version, an authorial afterword and an extra essay. Joyce Carol Oates's new novel, Middle Age: A Romance, has an extra commentary by Oates. Where can I buy ebooks and try free samples? Our pick of the best: WHSmith A newly launched ebook section on this British site mainly offers ebooks in Microsoft Reader. There is a good collection of titles on offer, from current fiction to classics, and a free sample of Oz Clarke's wine book to get you started. Barnes and Noble This American bookstore doesn't just sell ebooks, it publishes them as well. The new digital imprint revives previously out-of-print books alongside contemporary fiction and classics. This link takes you to a useful comparison of ebook readers. The much-vaunted free titles, however ("for a limited time", that is), are out-of-copyright classics you could pick up from Project Gutenberg. Amazon.co.uk Using Adobe Acrobat, Amazon provides a number of free downloads as well as a large range of ebooks, from the classics, to recent fiction and reference books. It's clearly explained which books are compatible with which format. From the 'hottest downloads' section, it's evident that customers are into business success, spirituality and Lara Croft. Directly from the publisher HarperCollins, Penguin and Random House all have ebook sections on their websites and these are worth exploring for newer fiction titles. Some HarperCollins authors, including Stephen King, JG Ballard and Joyce Carol Oates, are available in the Perfectbound ebook format. Ebooks are divided into subject area and available in Microsoft and Adobe format; added extras are clearly signposted (an exclusive afterword from King to Black House, a generous spattering of sample chapters). A regular ebook newsletter will keep you up to date with the latest releases. Penguin offers a wide range of ebooks, including Penguin Classics and Rough Guides. Big names include Melvin Burgess, Toby Litt and Andrew Rawnsley.You can download an ebook sampler (with Microsoft Reader). Random House, which also offers a free sampler, has a small catalogue of ebooks, many with a business/internet flavour. Some fiction is available, including older books by authors ranging from Martin Amis to Jilly Cooper and an inexplicable wealth of Ruth Rendell. Can I get my novel published in ebook format? Some electronic publishers simply place texts online in their raw form without any proofing or editing; others are more discriminating. Electronic publishing is much quicker than conventional publishing (it generally takes at least a year to get a manuscript printed). There's also a larger cut of the profits available for the author - if, of course, there are any. And as Mushroom Books points out, you'll never suffer the indignity of the remainder shelf. Online Originals is a well-established British company "dedicated to producing quality new literature regardless of its commercial potential" which accepts only one out of every 300 submissions. It garnered useful publicity in 1998 when it submitted Patricia le Roy's ebook, The Angels of Russia, for the Booker Prize. You can read extracts from the books and listen to clips; there is useful advice for new writers, including case studies of current online original authors. Mushroom Books is another British site "dedicated to bringing conventional publishing values to the new medium". It provides free samplers of books in all formats. Like Online Originals, it claims to be stringent in its criteria for choosing books. Over-heavy on the fantasy front; most titles involve some collision of myth and reality. Temporarily closed to submissions. Authors online is a comprehensive if unpolished site which claims to be "the UK's number one e-bookstore". For £31.70 it will look at your manuscript and, on agreeing to take it, charge £10 per year for hosting your work. You can browse other authors' work, buy ebooks directly from the site and discuss issues in the chatroom; there are also hints on editing and marketing your book. The company intends to move back towards conventional publishing, with plans to publish every ebook in "hard-copy format". What is the future for ebooks? In August 2000, Anderson Consulting forecast that ebooks would have 10% of the market by 2005. That outlook now seems wildly optimistic. Publishers and online bookstores say that even their bestselling ebooks have only managed to sell around 1,000 copies each, and most sell far fewer. Patricia Schroeder, president of the Association of American Publishers, which commissioned the Anderson study, admits the forecast was unrealistic. "That is going to be a stretch, to be honest," she told the New York Times. "I think everybody has hit the pause button on ebooks for the moment." One brake on the growth of the ebook market has been the technical snags that have prevented millions of users of handheld personal computers (operating Microsoft software) from reading most publishers' ebooks. Dick Brass, Microsoft's vice president of technology and development, last year declared that, by 2020, "90% of everything you read will be delivered in an electronic form." He believes that, with the introduction of new software next year, his prediction could still come true. "I always said it would be eight to 10 years before electronic publishing began to equal paper," he said, "and I am willing to live and die by those predictions." We may not be rushing to pay for ebooks, but it's clear that we're interested in the concept - if they're free. The University of Virginia's Electronic Library provides classic books for free; between August 2000 and June 2001, 3m titles had been downloaded. Further technological developments may be the key to the next phase of ebook growth. Research is now taking place to perfect an ebook reader that resembles an A4 sheet of flexible plastic which can display many different forms of text and be folded up. E Ink, one of the two companies developing this "electronic paper", revealed a prototype of a new lightweight e-reader, scheduled to go on sale in 2003. Its creators say it will be only a centimetre thick, with a seven-inch diagonal screen, and run on two AA batteries. Explore more on these topics Ebooks E-readers Share Reuse this content Most viewed Israel alone? Allies’ fears grow over conduct – and legality – of war in Gaza Cancer signs could be spotted years before symptoms, says new research institute Chance Perdomo, star of Gen V and Chilling Adventures of Sabrina, dead at 27 Ex-Trump adviser says former president ‘hasn’t got the brains’ for dictatorship Congressman rebuked for call to bomb Gaza ‘like Nagasaki and Hiroshima’ Related stories Ebooks are not 'stupid' – they're a revolution 21 Feb 2018 535 Margaret Drabble on the joy of ebooks 23 May 2014 14 Amazon licenses fan fiction ebooks 23 May 2013 14 Ebooks: winners in the generation game 27 May 2012 10 Ebooks: should their form determine their value? 22 Apr 2012 9 Ebooks: a more civilised way of scribbling in the margins? 25 Mar 2012 14 Amazon.com withdraws thousands of ebooks in pricing row with publishers 23 Feb 2012 30 Jonathan Franzen warns ebooks are corroding values 30 Jan 2012 445 More from Culture Godzilla x Kong: The New Empire review Another bout of monster stupidity 2h ago 6 ‘It’s cool’ Why Beyoncé is kicking down the doors of country music 4h ago ‘She was an unsung hero’ Billie Piper on playing producer Sam McAlister in a new drama about Prince Andrew’s Newsnight fiasco 7h ago Film Drift review – quietly mesmerising Greek island refugee tale 3h ago ‘My jaw dropped’ Annie Jacobsen on her scenario for nuclear war 4h ago Film Disco Boy review – Franz Rogowski adds another dimension to intense French Foreign Legion drama 3h ago 0