Search Create account Log in Photograph your local culture, help Wikipedia and win! Contents hide (Top) Modern film industry History Economics Statistics Criticism See also Footnotes Bibliography External links Film industry 35 languages Article Talk Read Edit View history Tools From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia The film industry or motion picture industry comprises the technological and commercial institutions of filmmaking, i.e., film production companies, film studios, cinematography, animation, film production, screenwriting, pre-production, post-production, film festivals, distribution, and actors. Though the expense involved in making films almost immediately led film production to concentrate under the auspices of standing production companies, advances in affordable filmmaking equipment, as well as an expansion of opportunities to acquire investment capital from outside the film industry itself, have allowed independent film production to evolve. In 2019, the global box office was worth $42.2 billion.[1] When including box office and home entertainment revenue, the global film industry was worth $136 billion in 2018.[2] Hollywood is the world's oldest national film industry, and largest in terms of box-office gross revenue. Indian cinema is the largest national film industry in terms of the number of films produced, with 2,446 feature films produced annually as of 2019.[3] Modern film industry[edit] World cinema African cinema Arab cinema Asian cinema East Asian cinema South Asian cinema Southeast Asian cinema West Asian cinema European cinema Latin American cinema North American cinema Oceanian cinema The worldwide theatrical market had a box office of US$42.2 billion in 2019. The top three continents/regions by box-office gross were Asia-Pacific with US$17.8 billion, the U.S. and Canada with US$11.4 billion, and Europe, the Middle East and North Africa with US$10.3 billion. As of 2019, the largest markets by box office were, in decreasing order, the United States, China, Japan, South Korea, the United Kingdom, France, and India.[1] As of 2019, the countries with the largest number of film productions were India, Nigeria, and the United States.[4] In Europe, significant centers of movie production are Italy, France, Germany, Spain, and the United Kingdom.[5] United States[edit] Main article: Cinema of the United States The Hollywood Sign The cinema of the United States, often generally referred to as Hollywood, has had a profound effect on cinema across the world since the early 20th century. The United States cinema (Hollywood) is the oldest film industry in the world and also the largest film industry in terms of revenue. Hollywood is the primary nexus of the U.S. film industry with established film study facilities such as the American Film Institute, LA Film School and NYFA being established in the area.[6] However, four of the six major film studios are owned by East Coast companies. The major film studios of Hollywood including Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, 20th Century Fox, and Paramount Pictures are the primary source of the most commercially successful movies in the world,[7][8] including movies such as The Sound of Music (1965), Star Wars (1977), Titanic (1997), and Avatar (2009). American film studios today collectively generate several hundred films every year, making the United States one of the most prolific producers of films in the world. Only The Walt Disney Company — which owns the Walt Disney Studios — is fully based in Southern California.[9] And while Sony Pictures Entertainment is headquartered in Culver City, California, its parent company, the Sony Corporation, is headquartered in Tokyo, Japan. Most shooting now[when?] takes place in California, New York, Louisiana, Georgia and North Carolina. New Mexico, especially in the Albuquerque and Santa Fe areas, had been an increasingly popular state for filming; the television showBreaking Bad was set there, and movies such as No Country for Old Men and Rust were shot there.[citation needed] Between 2009 and 2015, Hollywood consistently grossed $10 billion (or more) annually.[10] Hollywood's award ceremony, the Academy Awards, officially known as The Oscars, is held by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (AMPAS) every year and as of 2019, more than 3,000 Oscars have been awarded.[11] Nestor studio, 1911 On 27 October 1911, Nestor Film Company established Hollywood's first permanent film studio. The California weather allowed for year-round filming. In 1912, Universal Studios was formed, merging Nestor and several other motion picture companies, including Independent Moving Pictures (IMP). France[edit] Main article: Cinema of France France is the birthplace of cinema and was responsible for many of its significant contributions to the art form and the film-making process itself.[12] Several important cinematic movements, including the Nouvelle Vague, began in the country. It is noted for having a particularly strong film industry, due in part to protections afforded by the French government.[12] French cinema is sometimes intertwined with the cinema of foreign nations. Directors from nations such as Poland (Roman Polanski, Krzysztof Kieślowski, and Andrzej Żuławski), Argentina (Gaspar Noé and Edgardo Cozarinsky), Russia (Alexandre Alexeieff, Anatole Litvak), Austria (Michael Haneke), and Georgia (Géla Babluani, Otar Iosseliani) are prominent in the ranks of French cinema. Conversely, some French directors have had careers in other countries, such as Luc Besson, Jacques Tourneur, or Francis Veber in the United States. Another element supporting this fact is that Paris has the highest density of cinemas in the world, measured by the number of movie theaters per inhabitant,[13] and that in most "downtown Paris" movie theaters, foreign movies which would be secluded to "art houses" cinemas in other places are shown alongside "mainstream" works. Philippe Binant realized, on 2 February 2000, the first digital cinema projection in Europe, with the DLP CINEMA technology developed by Texas Instruments, in Paris.[14] Paris also boasts the Cité du cinéma, a major studio north of the city, and Disney Studio, a theme park devoted to the cinema and the third theme park near the city behind Disneyland and Parc Asterix.[15] In 2015, France saw a record-breaking 300 feature-length films produced.[16] US and UK films only represented 44.9% of total admissions in 2014. This is largely due to the commercial strength of domestic productions, which accounted for 44,5% of admissions in 2014 (35.5% in 2015; 35.3% in 2016).[17] In the mid-2000s, the French film industry was described as being "closer to being entirely self-sufficient than any other country in Europe, recovering around 80–90% of their budget in revenues generated from the domestic market".[18] In 2018, French films had an international box office of €237m with 40 million admissions (down 52% from 2017), with Italy being the top foreign market.[19] China[edit] Main article: Cinema of China Old Chinese Cinema in Qufu, Shandong The cinema of China is one of three distinct historical threads of Chinese-language cinema together with the cinema of Hong Kong and the cinema of Taiwan. Cinema was introduced in China in 1896 and the first Chinese film, Dingjun Mountain, was made in 1905, with the film industry being centered on Shanghai in the first decades. China is the home of one of the largest film studios in the world, the Hengdian World Studios, and in 2010 it had the third largest film industry by number of feature films produced annually. For the next decade the production companies were mainly foreign-owned, and the domestic film industry was centered on Shanghai, a thriving entrepot and the largest city in the Far East. In 1913, the first independent Chinese screenplay, The Difficult Couple, was filmed in Shanghai by Zheng Zhengqiu and Zhang Shichuan.[20] As the Sixth Generation[clarification needed] gained international exposure, many subsequent films were joint ventures and projects with international backers, but remained quite resolutely low-key and low budget[citation needed]. Jia's Platform (2000) was funded in part by Takeshi Kitano's production house,[21] while his Still Life was shot on HD video. Still Life was a surprise addition and Golden Lion winner of the 2006 Venice International Film Festival. Still Life, which concerns provincial workers around the Three Gorges region, sharply contrasts with the works of Fifth Generation Chinese directors like Zhang Yimou and Chen Kaige who were at the time producing House of Flying Daggers (2004) and The Promise (2005). It featured no star of international renown and was acted mostly by non-professionals. In 2012 the country became the second-largest market in the world by box office receipts. In 2014, the gross box office in China was ¥29.6 billion (US$4.82 billion), with domestic films having a share of 55%.[22] China has also become a major hub of business for Hollywood studios.[23][24] In 2018, China's gross box office was US$8.9 Billion[25] In 2013, China's gross box office was ¥21.8 billion (US$3.6 billion), the second-largest film market in the world by box office receipts[26] It increased to $4.8 Billion in 2014 box office grosser in film industry.[27] Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, in 2020 China overtook North America as world's biggest box office, being the first country to achieve this status.[28] China retained this status in 2021. However, in 2022, North America once again overtook China as the global box office's biggest market.[29] India[edit] Main article: Cinema of India Further information: Hindi cinema, Tamil cinema, Telugu cinema, Malayalam cinema, Kannada cinema, Cinema of West Bengal, and Marathi cinema A scene from Raja Harishchandra (1913) – credited as the first full-length Indian motion picture. India is the largest producer of films in the world and second-oldest film industry in the world.[30] The country is home to some of the most important cities in the global film industry: Mumbai (previously Bombay) and Chennai (Madras). In 2009, India produced a total of 2,961 films on celluloid; this figure includes 1,288 feature films.[31] Besides being the largest producer of films in the world, India also has the largest number of admissions.[32] Indian film industry is multi-lingual and the largest in the world in terms of ticket sales but 3rd-largest in terms of revenue, mainly due to having among the lowest ticket prices in the world.[33] The industry is viewed mainly by a vast film-going Indian public.[citation needed] Indian film industry is also the dominant source of films and entertainment in its neighboring countries of South Asia. The three largest film industries in India are Hindi cinema, Telugu cinema and Tamil cinema. The Hindi film industry mostly concentrated in Mumbai (Bombay), and it is commonly referred to as Bollywood, a portmanteau of Bombay and Hollywood. Telugu cinema is primarily concentrated in Hyderabad and is commonly referred to as Tollywood. The Tamil film industry i.e. Kollywood is mostly concentrated in Chennai. Besides the mainstream commercial movies, India also offers a different approach to cinema: the parallel cinema. The parallel cinema movement originated in West Bengal around the 1950s. The movement was initially led by Bengali cinema. It later gained prominence in other film industries of India. Parallel cinema is a blanket term designated to a certain type of films that stray away from the conventions of popular mainstream cinema.Parallel cinema has assumed various forms throughout the years. Filmmakers associated with parallel cinema are Satyajit Ray, Mrinal Sen, Ritwik Ghatak. Parallel films are characterized by their rejection of popular forms like the songs and fight sequences, their affinity for rural settings, use of method actors and toned down colour palettes. The best examples of parallel cinema are the most famous films of Ray – Pather Panchali (1955), Aparajito (1956) and The World of Apu (1959) – which formed The Apu Trilogy. Some other examples of such movies are Raincoat, Dhobi Ghat, Mithya. Indian films have garnered popularity not only in the domestic market but also in the international markets, with Dangal having an overseas gross revenue of $260 million, Secret Superstar and Bajrangi Bhaijaan making a gross revenue of $80.4 million, and Baahubali: The Beginning and Baahubali 2: The Conclusion (a blockbuster duology from Telugu cinema) grossing over $370 million globally.[34] In India, they have over 400 production houses with 32 corporate houses; also supporting the livelihood of more than 6 million people.[35] The other largest film industries are Malayalam cinema, Kannada cinema, Bengali cinema (cinema of West Bengal) and Marathi cinema, primarily located in Kochi, Bengaluru, Kolkata, and Mumbai, respectively. The remaining majority portion is spread across northern, western, eastern and southern India (with Gujarati, Punjabi, Odia, Bhojpuri, Assamese Cinema). However, there are several smaller centers of Indian film industries in regional languages centered in the states where those languages are spoken. Indian cinema encloses a number of several artforms like Indian classical music, folk music of different regions throughout the country, Indian classical dance, folk dance and much more.