HOME ARTISTS CATALOGS 3D EXHIBITIONS LIBRARY 1819 BLOG CONTACT 0 Español The art of photography by Israel Domingo | Feb 5, 2022 | Articles | 0 Comments For a large number of years, photography began to be viewed in the artistic world as a mode of expression that is credited to the individual who has the ability to capture various styles, according to his vision with the environment that surrounds him . That is why, if you want to know more details about what is currently distinguished as the art of photography, the invitation is to continue reading the following lines. What is known as the art of photography? Before going into details with any element that is related to the art of photography, it is necessary that we dedicate a few lines to describe this current. It is said that the creation of an artistic photograph is the capture of a wide variety of styles. Its main objective is based on being able to capture the authenticity of the moment through an instant image. In addition to this, the art of photography seeks to give the author the possibility of demonstrating his intention, his thoughts and his will to star in a certain scene. On many occasions, the main idea of artists with this type of photography is to be able to demonstrate elements that go far beyond what can be seen with the naked eye. Unlike the artistic creations that everyone is used to, it can be said that photography can enter into an analysis, where the clear intention of its creator is evident. Without a doubt, this is a branch to which new aspects, needs, thoughts and concerns of people are added every day. The formation of the art of photography Like all artistic manifestations, the art of photography also requires adequate academic training so that people can do their best work. In other words, it can be said that the art of photography requires sufficient vocation and professionalism for images to be made. Thanks to continuous advances, it is known that this is an artistic movement that, because it is one of the most contemporary arts that can be had, has an immensity of support that adapts to the ideas of each person. Fortunately, nowadays you can have on hand a large number of academies that are dedicated to the training and study of all the elements that must be captured in a photograph . In this way, each individual will be able to empathize in their own style that represents their artistic identity at all times. For this reason, it is considered that having a professional camera goes far beyond simply pressing the shutter and capturing what can be seen with the naked eye. The necessary techniques must be educated and studied. Elements of a photograph to be considered a work of art Although many people consider that every photographic image is a work of art, the truth is that this cultural world has some standards that must be met to be considered a true work of art, among them we can mention the following: One of the main qualities that photographs must have is the ability to surprise people at first glance . It is said that the beauty of these can leave more than one person with their mouths open, while at the same time leading them to imagine an endless number of elements. In addition to the above, the true work of art must be based on a concept, a theme or an idea that can support it at all times. Another essential characteristic that photography must have is being able to leave a significant mark in the memory of those who appreciate the work at a given moment. That is to say, the art of photography cannot go unnoticed in the eyes of people. Finally, it could be said that another significant element in this type of photography is that the photographer takes exhaustive care regarding the techniques and aesthetic beauty that he or she wishes to show in each of the images he or she takes. Finally, it is also important that you make it very clear what type of photograph you want to take, whether it is a self-portrait, a conceptual image, an author's portrait or any other image that comes to mind. Send comment Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked * Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment. Representation Artists Process/Technique Want to keep up? Receive news, reports and offers Subscribe Starting to collect art is always an exhilarating adventure. From 1819 art gallery we want to accompany you. © 2019 – 1819.es Navigation PLAYS US NEXT EXHIBITION Privacy Policy Terms and Conditions Legal Notice Want to keep up? Receive news, reports and offers Subscribe to our Newsletter