This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted advertising purposes. You may change your settings at any time or accept the default settings. You may close this banner to continue with only essential cookies. Privacy Policy Storage Preferences Targeted Advertising Personalization Analytics Save Accept All Reject All Education Menu DONATE Saved by 159 educators ENCYCLOPEDIC ENTRY Taoism Taoism is an ancient Chinese philosophy and religion that instructs believers on how to exist in harmony with the universe. GRADES 5 - 8 SUBJECTS Anthropology, Religion, Social Studies, World History, Storytelling IMAGE Mount Laojun Mount Laojun in Luoyan, Henan Province, China is a sacred site for Taoists. Hundreds of Taoists embark on pilgrimages every year along with tourists from around the world to see this spectacular site. PHOTOGRAPH BY HELLORF ZCOOL / SHUTTERSTOCK ARTICLEVOCABULARY Taoism (also spelled Daoism) is a religion and a philosophy from ancient China that has influenced folk and national belief. Taoism has been connected to the philosopher Lao Tzu, who around 500 B.C.E. wrote the main book of Taoism, the Tao Te Ching. Taoism holds that humans and animals should live in balance with the Tao, or the universe. Taoists believe in spiritual immortality, where the spirit of the body joins the universe after death. The Tao Te Ching, or “The Way and Its Power,” is a collection of poetry and sayings from around the third and fourth centuries B.C.E. that guides Taoist thought and actions. While the author is traditionally believed to be the philosopher Lao Tzu, there is little evidence that Lao Tzu existed at all. Rather, the Tao Te Ching is a gathering of earlier sayings from many authors. This book was given an origin with the philosopher Lao Tzu for cultural and political reasons. Lao Tzu is sometimes understood as the image of the Tao, or a god, and given legendary status. The Tao (or Dao) is hard to define but is sometimes understood as the way of the universe. Taoism teaches that all living creatures ought to live in a state of harmony with the universe, and the energy found in it. Ch’i, or qi, is the energy present in and guiding everything in the universe. The Tao Te Ching and other Taoist books provide guides for behavior and spiritual ways of living in harmony with this energy. However, Taoists do not believe in this energy as a god. Rather, there are gods as part of the Taoist beliefs, often introduced from the various cultures found in the region known now as China. These gods are part of the Tao, like all living things. Taoism has temples, monasteries, and priests who make offerings, meditate, and perform other rituals for their communities. One of the main ideas of Taoism is the belief in balancing forces, or yin and yang. These ideas represent matching pairs, such as light and dark, hot and cold, action and inaction, which work together toward a universal whole. Yin and yang show that everything in the universe is connected and that nothing makes sense by itself. Taoism became well-known in the eighth century C.E. as the religion of the Tang dynasty. In the following centuries, it existed alongside Buddhism and Confucianism (another philosophical religion). However, during the Communist takeover in 1949, Taoism, Confucianism, and other religions were banned. This caused a decline in the practice of Taoism in China. Many modern Taoists live in Taiwan, although recent reforms in China have increased the number of Chinese Taoists. Credits User Permissions RELATED RESOURCES ENCYCLOPEDIC ENTRY Confucianism Confucianism is one of the most influential religious philosophies in the history of China, and it has existed for over 2,500 years. It is concerned with inner virtue, morality, and respect for the community and its values. 183 COLLECTION Ancient Civilization: China Ancient China is responsible for a rich culture, still evident in modern China. From small farming communities rose dynasties such as the Zhou (1046-256 B.C.E.), Qin (221-206 B.C.E.), and Ming (1368-1644 C.E.). Each had its own contribution to the region. 330 ARTICLE Imperial China's Dynasties From the mythic origins of the Chinese dynasties to the eventual fall of the last imperial house, Chinese emperors have long fought to maintain control over one of the most enduring empires on Earth. The rise and fall of various imperial families oversaw waves of innovation and cultural advancement. 219 ARTICLE Beautiful Babylon: Jewel of the Ancient World Ruled by Hammurabi, restored by Nebuchadrezzar, conquered by Cyrus—this city in the heart of Mesopotamia was both desired and despised, placing it at the center stage of the dawn of history. 244 COLLECTION MapMaker: Human Histories and Cultures In this collection you will find resources and activities specifically designed to accompany National Geographic MapMaker, a Geographic Information System (GIS) tool for the classroom built in partnership with Esri. The maps in this collection showcase information and data related to Human Histories and Cultures, one of six focus areas of National Geographic Explorers. Maps are powerful devices that allow us to find our way, analyze and visualize complex datasets, solve problems, and tell stories. They also facilitate learning. The materials featured here are built on the National Geography Standards and the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals. Today's students need to understand how the world is interconnected, and master the geographic competencies and knowledge necessary for sustainably enhancing economic competitiveness, preserving and improving quality of life, sustaining the environment, and ensuring national security. Learn more about using the latest version of MapMaker. 7 National Geographic Headquarters 1145 17th Street NW Washington, DC 20036 ABOUT National Geographic Society NatGeo.com News and Impact Contact Us EXPLORE Our Explorers Our Programs Education Nat Geo Live Storytellers Collective Traveling Exhibitions JOIN US Ways to Give Apply for a Grant Careers DONATE GET UPDATES CONNECT National Geographic Society is a 501 (c)(3) organization. © 1996 - 2024 National Geographic Society. All rights reserved. Privacy Notice|Sustainability Policy|Terms of Service|Code of Ethics