This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted advertising purposes. You may change your settings at any time or accept the default settings. You may close this banner to continue with only essential cookies. Privacy Policy Storage Preferences Targeted Advertising Personalization Analytics Save Accept All Reject All Education Menu DONATE Saved by 21 educators ENCYCLOPEDIC ENTRY OPEN EDUCATIONAL RESOURCE Buddhism Buddhism is one of the world’s largest religions and originated 2,500 years ago in India. Buddhists believe that the human life is one of suffering, and that meditation, spiritual and physical labor, and good behavior are the ways to achieve enlightenment, or nirvana. GRADES 5 - 8 SUBJECTS Religion, Social Studies, Storytelling PHOTOGRAPH Buddhist Prayer Candles Incense are lit inside of Kun Yam Temple in Macao. Incense and meditation play an important role in Buddhism. PHOTOGRAPH BY JOE SCHERSCHEL PHOTOGRAPH PHOTOGRAPH ARTICLEVOCABULARY Learning materials INSTRUCTIONAL LINKS Buddhism (Google Doc) Buddhism is one of the world’s major religions. It originated in South Asia around the 5th century B.C.E. with Siddhartha Gautama, and over the next millennia it spread across Asia and the rest of the world. Buddhists believe that human life is a cycle of suffering and rebirth, but that if one achieves a state of enlightenment (nirvana), it is possible to escape this cycle forever. Siddhartha Gautama was the first person to reach this state of enlightenment and was, and is still today, known as the Buddha. Buddhists do not believe in any kind of deity or god, although there are supernatural figures who can help or hinder people on the path towards enlightenment. Born on the Nepali side of the present day Nepal-India border, Siddhartha Gautama was a prince around the fifth century B.C.E. who, upon seeing people poor and dying, realized that human life is suffering. He renounced his wealth and spent time as a poor beggar, meditating and traveling but ultimately, remaining unsatisfied, settling on something called “the Middle Way.” This idea meant that neither extreme asceticism nor extreme wealth was the path to enlightenment, but rather, a way of life between the two extremes was. Eventually, in a state of deep meditation, he achieved enlightenment, or nirvana, underneath the Bodhi tree (the tree of awakening). The Mahabodhi Temple in Bihar, India—the site of his enlightenment—is now a major Buddhist pilgrimage site. The Buddha taught about Four Noble Truths. The first truth is called “Suffering (dukkha),” which teaches that everyone in life is suffering in some way. The second truth is “Origin of suffering (samudāya).” This states that all suffering comes from desire (tanhā). The third truth is “Cessation of suffering (nirodha),” and it says that it is possible to stop suffering and achieve enlightenment. The fourth truth, “Path to the cessation of suffering (magga)” is about the Middle Way, which is the steps to achieve enlightenment. Buddhists believe in a wheel of rebirth into different bodies. This is connected to “karma,” which refers to how a person’s good or bad actions in the past or in their past lives can impact them in the future. There are three main schools of Buddhism: Mahayana, Theravada, and Vajrayana. Mahayana Buddhism is common in China, Taiwan, Japan, and South Korea. It emphasizes the role models of bodhisattvas (beings that have achieved enlightenment but return to teach humans). Theravada Buddhism is common in Sri Lanka, Cambodia, Thailand, Laos, and Burma (Myanmar). It emphasizes a monastic lifestyle and meditation as the way to enlightenment. Vajrayana is the major school of Buddhism in the region of Tibet and in Nepal, Bhutan, and Mongolia. It offers followers a faster path to enlightenment than Mahayana or Theravada. The head of the Tibetan school of Buddhism and traditional leader of Tibet, the Dalai Lama, fled from China-controlled Tibet in 1959 to India in fear of his life. Many Tibetan Buddhists actively resist Chinese control of the region. Recently, the current Dalai Lama, who is understood to be the 14th reincarnation of the first Dalai Lama, has raised questions over whether and where he will choose to reincarnate. The National Geographic Society is making this content available under a Creative Commons CC-BY-NC-SA license. The License excludes the National Geographic Logo (meaning the words National Geographic + the Yellow Border Logo) and any images that are included as part of each content piece. For clarity the Logo and images may not be removed, altered, or changed in any way. Credits User Permissions RELATED RESOURCES ARTICLE Chinese Religions and Philosophies Confucianism, Taoism, and Buddhism were the three main philosophies and religions of ancient China, which have individually and collectively influenced ancient and modern Chinese society. 231 LEARNING TOOL OER Conducting Powerful Conversations These tipsheets provide four different ways to structure conversations with learners or community members. The PDF resources in the carousel below include (from left to right): The Affinity Protocol; The Socratic Seminar; The Tuning Protocol; The Save the Last Word for Me Protocol. Scroll below the resources for guidance on using these resources in your education work. 21 COLLECTION MapMaker: Human Histories and Cultures In this collection you will find resources and activities specifically designed to accompany National Geographic MapMaker, a Geographic Information System (GIS) tool for the classroom built in partnership with Esri. The maps in this collection showcase information and data related to Human Histories and Cultures, one of six focus areas of National Geographic Explorers. Maps are powerful devices that allow us to find our way, analyze and visualize complex datasets, solve problems, and tell stories. They also facilitate learning. The materials featured here are built on the National Geography Standards and the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals. Today's students need to understand how the world is interconnected, and master the geographic competencies and knowledge necessary for sustainably enhancing economic competitiveness, preserving and improving quality of life, sustaining the environment, and ensuring national security. Learn more about using the latest version of MapMaker. 7 ENCYCLOPEDIC ENTRY Confucianism Confucianism is one of the most influential religious philosophies in the history of China, and it has existed for over 2,500 years. It is concerned with inner virtue, morality, and respect for the community and its values. 183 COLLECTION Ancient Civilization: China Ancient China is responsible for a rich culture, still evident in modern China. From small farming communities rose dynasties such as the Zhou (1046-256 B.C.E.), Qin (221-206 B.C.E.), and Ming (1368-1644 C.E.). Each had its own contribution to the region. 330 COLLECTION Asian American and Pacific Islander Heritage Month People with ancestral roots in Asia and the islands of the Pacific have been integral to the story of America. To celebrate their heritage and contributions, in 1992, May was designated Asian American and Pacific Islander Heritage Month. The month of May was selected in recognition of the arrival of the first Japanese immigrants in the United States on May 7, 1843, and the significant contributions of Chinese laborers to the completion of North America's transcontinental railroad on May 10, 1869. Currently, those from Asia and the Pacific Islands account for more than 4.7 billion of Earth's 7.9 billion people. And those numbers do not account for the Asian diaspora scattered throughout the rest of the world. Celebrate and learn more about their heritage through this collection. The National Geographic Society acknowledges the increase in discrimination and violence against Asians and Pacific Islanders globally—including here in the United States—in light of the COVID-19 pandemic. Hate and violence toward Asian American and Pacific Islander (AAPI) communities has no place in our world, and we stand with our AAPI communities. 96 National Geographic Headquarters 1145 17th Street NW Washington, DC 20036 ABOUT National Geographic Society NatGeo.com News and Impact Contact Us EXPLORE Our Explorers Our Programs Education Nat Geo Live Storytellers Collective Traveling Exhibitions JOIN US Ways to Give Apply for a Grant Careers DONATE GET UPDATES CONNECT National Geographic Society is a 501 (c)(3) organization. © 1996 - 2024 National Geographic Society. All rights reserved. Privacy Notice|Sustainability Policy|Terms of Service|Code of Ethics