Open main menu JOIN Login Bible Trivia Daily Verse Read the Bible Jesus Prayer Bible Study Marriage Christian Living Theology Church History End Times Videos Devotionals Podcasts Why Does a Good God Allow Evil Things to Happen? One of the most common reasons that skeptics give for rejecting God or the Gospel relates to the problems of pain, evil, and suffering in the world. ALEX MCFARLAND SPEAKER UPDATED APR 02, 2024 SHARE The great thinker C.S. Lewis (1898-1963) dealt with many of the common objections against Christianity that are still heard today. Lewis once compared the atheist’s arguments against God to an inmate in an asylum writing the word “darkness” over and over on the wall. The arguments framed against God succeed in blotting Him out to the same degree that the insane person’s fixation on “darkness” shuts off the reality of the sun: In other words — not at all. One of the most common reasons that skeptics give for rejecting God or the Gospel relates to the problems of pain, evil, and suffering in the world. Having personally interviewed dozens of atheists and agnostics over the years (including recent luminaries of unbelief, such as Christopher Hitchens, Michael Shermer, Bart Ehrman, and others), I have heard this objection raised in many ways. The “problem of evil” is often stated like this: If God were wise, good, and powerful, the world would not be the way it is. But the world is full of violence, suffering, injustice, and sickness, and very often, those who suffer most are innocent victims. The atheist reasons, “This world of deceit, danger, and death would be different if God were truly real. Either He (#1) doesn't know how to fix it, or perhaps (#2) He is malicious and doesn’t want to fix it. Or maybe (#3) God wants to fix it but is unable.” Think about this: If the cause of evil is (#1), then God is not truly wise. If (#2), God is not wholly good. If evil exists and persists because of (#3), then He is not all-powerful. In any case, atheism assumes that a classically orthodox view of God cannot be maintained. Pain and suffering must prove God is not omniscient, omnibenevolent, or omnipotent. Therefore, the skeptic says the Biblical God must not exist. Not so fast, junior! In order to respond to objections based on the problem of evil, we have to ask ourselves, “How is it that we humans are able to judge anything as ‘good’ or ‘bad?’” Let’s reign in the hubris and be honest here: Without an objective standard from which to measure, all we say about good or evil is mere bloviation. Erase God (the ultimate standard of good by which we measure) from our logic tree, and can we meaningfully recognize something as right or wrong? No. When we say that one thing is good or another thing is bad — what we are really doing is assessing their value as it relates to something else. And that “something else” that we measure by is . . . God. Deep down, we understand that God is the ultimate — the ultimate foundation of goodness, love, power, virtue, beauty, wisdom, mercy, holiness, etc. Put together every positive characteristic you can think of and multiply to the nth degree, and that conglomeration of everything “good” is God. When we say that Mother Theresa was “good” and Osama Bin Laden was “bad,” what we are really saying is this: Her life and actions conformed more closely to any ultimate standard of good than did his. Think about these contrasts: “It is better to care for orphans than to torture them,” or “Feeding the hungry is moral, whereas placing bets on how long it would take them to starve is immoral.” We know that the first proposition conforms more closely to an ultimate standard of goodness than the second. By a long way. In a world without God, nothing could be beautiful. Or ugly. Recommended 4 Daily Rhythms That Will Help You Experience God Each of us regularly makes value judgments about morals and aesthetics. We say, “This was heroic,” or, “That was treasonous.” We may observe, “This song is beautiful,” whereas, “That jackhammer is noisy.” We could only make such value judgments because there is an ultimate and unchanging standard against which we measure. Herein lies the atheist’s problem: If there is no God, how can you legitimately praise the good and condemn the evil? The answer is you can’t—not in any legitimate, objective sense. Without God, all we are left with is a noisy room full of opinions. And in that context, why is the atheist more valid than the Christian? If this is a world without objective values, and all life arose from blind, evolutionary chance, then why would we assume the atheist’s musings against God are any more coherent than the inflections of a barking dog? Without God as our reference point, there’s no good or bad—only “stuff.” The most we could note is that “Things happen.” Meaningful judgment beyond that is not possible. Make the “ruler” your own personal “Ruler” It takes humility and maturity to really accept this, but the evil in the world simply shows how desperately we need a Savior and Lord. Some people are honest and wise enough to accept this by the age of five or six. Others live eight or nine decades, never yielding to it. Because God is the ground of truth, goodness, and, yes, beauty — we are able to discern and make sense of the world. Be glad for this the next time you hear a skeptic railing against God because of pain and evil in the world. Because a pervasively righteous God does exist, each human possesses (and may cultivate) a moral conscience and aesthetic sensibilities. Are love and truth preferable over narcissism and wokeness? Would forcibly keeping the southern border open be morally just at the expense of the welfare of American citizens? Is the music of Brian Wilson or the Beatles objectively better than Drake, The Weeknd, or Taylor Swift? Because God exists, we actually can know. Photo Credit: ©Pixabay/Khusen Rustamov/xusenru Dr. Alex McFarland is a youth, religion, and culture expert, a national talk show host and speaker, educator, and author of 20 books. McFarland directs Biblical Worldview and apologetics for Charis Bible College in Woodland Park, CO. Via the American Family Radio Network, Alex is heard live on Exploring the Word, airing daily on nearly 200 radio stations across the U.S. Christianity / Theology / God / Why Does a Good God Allow Evil Things to Happen? PROMOTED CONTENT Did They Lie To Us In This Movie? BRAINBERRIES And They Did Show This In Bohemian Rapsody! BRAINBERRIES The 10 Most Stunning Women From Lebanon - Who Is Your Favorite? BRAINBERRIES Disney’s Live-Action Simba Was Based On The Cutest Lion Cub Ever BRAINBERRIES What Are You Going To Bring? - Encouragement Café - October 3 CROSSWALK.COM Discover 15 Surprising Things Forbidden By The Bible BRAINBERRIES Unveiling Hypocrisy: 15 Taboos The Bible Condemns! BRAINBERRIES Critics Were Impressed By The Way She Portrayed Grace Kelly BRAINBERRIES Tarantino’s Latest Effort Will Probably Be His Best To Date BRAINBERRIES Bible Pathway - April 4 CHRISTIANITY.COM How Did They Get Gina Carano To Take It All Back? BRAINBERRIES 15 Things You Do Everyday That The Bible Forbids: Are You Guilty? BRAINBERRIES She Spends Millions To Transform Herself Into A Barbie Doll! BRAINBERRIES It's The End Of The Road: The Worst TV Series Finales Of All Time BRAINBERRIES Why Big Bang Theory Fans Despise These 8 Characters BRAINBERRIES 6 Easy Ways to Promote Peace in Your Life Today If life feels chaotic and you need a strong dose of peace in this moment, right now, then you're in the right place. Join Rachel Wojo as she shares 6 easy ways to promote peace in your life today. Her simple, straightforward tips and ideas will help you enjoy more peaceful moments right now, right where you are. Today on Christianity.com 4 Daily Rhythms That Will Help You Experience God Becoming More Like Christ in Your Marriage through the Sanctifying Power of Conflict Why Does a Good God Allow Evil Things to Happen? Most Popular The Seven Last Words of Jesus from the Cross Explained JUSTIN HOLCOMB 50 Easter Bible Trivia Questions to Test Your Knowledge DR. SANDRA HAMER SMITH What Is the New Jerusalem? LISA LORAINE BAKER What is the Bible Meaning of "He is Risen" from Matthew 28? CHRISTIANITY.COM EDITORIAL STAFF Why Do We Say 'He Has Risen' During Easter? EMMA DANZEY Today's Devotional When Influential Trouble Comes in Waves - Your Daily Bible Verse - April 4 Much like hard times come in seasons, trouble comes in waves. Before we allow our lives to be swayed, it’s wise to determine the direction of the waves. Continue reading... Free Bible Trivia Games Bible Baseball Play now... Saintly Millionaire Play now... Bible Jeopardy Play now... Bible Trivia By Category Play now... Bible Trivia Challenge Play now... About Christianity.com About Us Advertise with Us Feedback Terms of Use Site Map Privacy Policy Link to Us RSS California - CCPA Notice California - Do Not Sell My Personal Information Christianity.com is a member of the Salem Web Network of sites including: BibleStudyTools.com • Crosscards.com • Crosswalk.com • GodTube.com • iBelieve.com • Lightsource.com • Oneplace.com • ChristianHeadlines.com Copyright © 2024, Christianity.com. All rights reserved. Article Images Copyright © 2024 Getty Images unless otherwise indicated.