Search Britannica Click here to search Login Subscribe Home Games & Quizzes History & Society Science & Tech Biographies Animals & Nature Geography & Travel Arts & Culture Money Videos Discover The Love Quiz A Study of Religion: Fact or Fiction? From Athena to Zeus: Basics of Greek Mythology A Study of Greek and Roman Mythology Oh My Heavens: A Quiz Jason and the Argonauts Quiz Ancient Greek Gods and Demigods Quiz Why Is the Mona Lisa So Famous? 6 Wars of Independence 10 Important Dates in Pluto History 9 of the World’s Deadliest Snakes The Largest Islands in the World Why Do Some Cicadas Appear Only Every 17 Years? 7 of History's Most Notorious Serial Killers Home List Philosophy & Religion History & Society 12 Greek Gods and Goddesses Cite Share Written by Richard Pallardy Fact-checked by The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica AdstockRF Cruel and fickle, passionate and vindictive, jealous and insecure, petty and insane: the inhabitants of Mount Olympus represent an attempt by the ancient Greeks to explain the chaos of the universe through human nature. Thus, like every deity invented before and since, these gods and goddesses are embodiments of human solipsism. (Of course lightning is caused by a giant, angry man in the sky…obvi. I mean, what else could it be?) The stories of their battles, bickering, and sexual conquests have indelibly influenced the course of Western language and narrative. Here is a selection of some of the A-list names of the Greek pantheon. Aphrodite Titian: Venus and Adonis Venus and Adonis, oil on canvas by Titian, 1554; in the National Gallery, London, England. © Photos.com/Jupiterimages Aphrodite was the goddess of love, sex, and beauty. Unsurprisingly for a love goddess, she was said to have emerged from the foam generated when the severed testicles of her father, Uranus, were thrown into the sea by his son, the Titan Cronus. (Or is that surprising?) Kind of makes Botticelli’s surreally lovely Birth of Venus—which depicts Aphrodite’s Roman counterpart emerging from the waves—a little more visceral, doesn’t it? Athena Athena © Sergey Rusakov/Shutterstock.com Athena was the goddess of reason, wisdom, and war. She famously sprung fully formed from the forehead of Zeus. A major figure in the Odyssey, in which she instructed Odysseus, she also guided Perseus and Heracles through their trials. The Parthenon was her chief temple in Athens, which is named in her honor. Her Roman equivalent was Minerva. Artemis Artemis Artemis as a huntress; in the Louvre, Paris Alinari/Art Resource, New York Artemis was the fleet-footed goddess of the hunt. Often depicted in painting and sculpture with a deer or a hunting dog, she was both huntress and protectress of the living world. Her Roman equivalent was Diana. Ares Ares Ares, classical sculpture; in the National Roman Museum, Rome. Anderson—Alinari/Art Resource, New York Ares was the god of bloodlust. (His half-sister Athena represented the more "noble" aspects of combat and civil conduct during war.) Though his fellow deities weren’t particularly fond of him, the Spartans had no problems, er, donating some prisoners of war to his worship. And sacrificing dogs…yeah, that’s right, Ares liked dead puppies. Jerk. His Roman equivalent was Mars. Apollo Apollo Belvedere, restored Roman copy of the Greek original attributed to Leochares, 4th century bc; in the Vatican Museum, Rome Alinari/Art Resource, New York The twin brother of Artemis, Apollo was among the most important (read: feared) of the gods. Son of Zeus, he disseminated the will of his divine compatriots through various means, notably oracles. The Oracle at Delphi was his mouthpiece; a 2001 study determined that the oracle was likely hallucinating due to ethylene gas rising from the rocks beneath the temple. Demeter Demeter Demeter, statue, mid-4th century bce; in the British Museum, London. © Magryt/Dreamstime.com Demeter, an agricultural goddess, was mother to Persephone, who was abducted by the underworld god Hades to be his bride. While searching for her stolen daughter, she accepted the hospitality of the royal family of Eleusis. The Eleusinian Mysteries, perhaps the most important religious rites in ancient Greece, are attributed to her teachings. Her Roman equivalent was Ceres. Dionysus Dionysus © Photos.com/Thinkstock Dionysus was a son of Zeus born to a mortal mother. When Zeus accidentally killed her, he sewed the young Dionysus into his thigh and, when the young god emerged, passed him to the care of the maenads. The cult of Dionysus revolved around intoxication, sex, and savage ritual sacrifice. He was often symbolized by a bull due to his association with the sacrificial animal. Elements of his character are seen in the Roman god of wine, Bacchus. Hades Gian Lorenzo Bernini: Pluto and Proserpina Pluto and Proserpina, marble sculpture by Gian Lorenzo Bernini, 1621–22; in the Borghese Gallery, Rome. Anderson—Alinari/Art Resource, New York Hades ruled the world of the dead, with which he was sometimes synonymous. The chilly lord of the underworld was among the few Greek gods to come across as dispassionate. He was not the ultimate judge of the souls that wandered his domain nor did he mete out their punishments for sins committed during their mortal lives. He was, however, cunning; he tricked Persephone into eating enchanted pomegranate seeds so that she would have to remain with him for a portion of the year. Hera the gods on Olympus The gods on Olympus: Athena, Zeus, Dionysus, Hera, and Aphrodite. Detail of a painting on a Greek cup; in the National Archaeological Museum, Tarquinia, Italy. Alinari/Art Resource, New York The queen goddess of Olympus, Hera was both sister and wife to Zeus. Though she is often depicted as reserved and austere, she was mercilessly vindictive when it came to her husband’s [many] extramarital adventures. Unfortunately for the objects of Zeus’s godly affections, Hera tended to torment the "other women" (and their offspring, including Heracles) rather than Zeus himself. Her Roman equivalent was Juno. Hermes Hermes Hermes bearing a caduceus, Roman copy, c. 1st century ce, of a Greek sculpture, c. 350 bce; in the British Museum. Courtesy of the trustees of the British Museum Like many gods in the Greek pantheon, Hermes presided over multiple spheres. He was a pastoral figure, responsible for protecting livestock, and was also associated with fertility, music, luck, and deception. In the Odyssey, he is depicted as a messenger god. His Roman equivalent was Mercury. Poseidon Poseidon Poseidon hurling his trident, coin (reverse), 306–282 bce. Diameter 1.1 inches (28 mm). WGS Photofile Poseidon is best known as the Greek sea god, but he was also the god of horses and of earthquakes. (Thus, many of his temples were inland.) And he had some seriously strange children. Though humanoid, he fathered both the winged horse Pegasus (by Medusa, no less) and the Cyclops Polyphemus, who is blinded by Odysseus and his crew in the Odyssey. His Roman equivalent was Neptune. Zeus Ganymede and Zeus in the form of an eagle, antique marble statue; in the Vatican Museum Anderson—Alinari/Art Resource, New York With the assistance of Hades and Poseidon, Zeus overthrew his father, Cronus, king of the Titans, and became the chief deity in a new pantheon comprising mostly his siblings and children. In addition to controlling the weather, Zeus was noted for his chronic infidelity to his sister-wife, Hera. Among the results of his weakness for comely mortal women was Helen of Troy. His Roman equivalent was Jupiter. Discover Planets and the Earth’s Moon Wee Worlds: Our 5 (Official) Dwarf Planets How Fast Is the Universe Expanding? Timeline of the 2000s Faces of Science Space: Fact or Fiction? Science: Fact or Fiction? 11 Egyptian Gods and Goddesses The Largest Islands in the World 10 Important Dates in Pluto History The Sun Was Eaten: 6 Ways Cultures Have Explained Eclipses 6 Wars of Independence New Seven Wonders of the World What’s the Difference Between Morality and Ethics? Home List Science Science & Tech 10 Important Dates in Pluto History Cite Share Written by Erik Gregersen Fact-checked by The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica April 6, 1929: Search for Planet X Begins Lowell, Percival Percival Lowell. Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. In 1902 astronomer Percival Lowell noted that the orbits of comets seemed to indicate that there was a planet beyond Neptune. Lowell had begun a search for the mysterious planet at his observatory in Arizona in 1905. He died in 1916 and willed most of his estate to the observatory. However, his wife, Constance, contested the will, and the search for “Planet X” was put on hold until 1927, when the litigation was resolved in Lowell Observatory’s favor. A new telescope was built especially for the search, which began with newly hired Lowell Observatory assistant Clyde Tombaugh exposing the first photographic plates of the newly revived search. February 18, 1930: Pluto Discovered Pluto, discovery of Pluto (denoted here by the arrows) was revealed to its discoverer, astronomer Clyde Tombaugh, through its movement between January 23, 1930, and January 29, 1930, the dates on which the first and second photographs, respectively, were taken. Lowell Observatory Photograph Tombaugh took many photographs of the region of the sky where Lowell had predicted Planet X would be. He compared photos taken days apart by using a blink comparator, which superimposed the images of the two plates and blinked rapidly between them. Stars would remain stationary, but a planet would move between the time the photos were taken, and the rapid blinking of the comparator would make it rapidly move back and forth. After less than a year of searching, Tombaugh found Pluto on two plates taken in January 1930. March 14, 1930: Pluto Gets Its Name Phair, Venetia Childhood photograph of Venetia Phair. NASA The discovery of Pluto was announced on March 13, 1930. The news traveled all over the world. The next day Falconer Madan, who had been the head of the Bodleian Library at the University of Oxford, read the news at breakfast to his daughter, Ethel Burney, and her 11-year-old daughter, Venetia (later Venetia Phair). Venetia knew her mythology and suggested Pluto, the Roman god of the underworld. Madan loved the name and contacted his friend, astronomer Herbert Hall Turner, who contacted Lowell University. Many other names had been suggested, such as Minerva and Persephone, but Tombaugh and the other Lowell astronomers selected Pluto, which had Percival Lowell’s initials as its first two letters. June 22, 1978: Charon Discovered Pluto; Charon Pluto (centre) and Charon (lower left), as observed by the European Space Agency's Faint Object Camera aboard the Hubble Space Telescope. From National Aeronautics and Space Administration/European Space Agency Pluto had seemed to be alone at the edge of the solar system, but U.S. Naval Observatory astronomers James Christy and Robert Harrington noticed that images they had taken of Pluto had a bump. They looked at earlier images of Pluto and noticed that the bump moved around Pluto with a period of 6.4 days. Pluto had a moon! Charon, with a diameter of about 1,208 km (751 miles), is half as big as Pluto (2,370 km [1,470 miles]). The two are sometimes called a double planet. February 7, 1979: Pluto Crosses Neptune’s Orbit Neptune The spacecraft Voyager 2 flew for 12 years before it got close enough to Neptune to send a clear photograph back to Earth. The planet's surface appears to be smooth because it is made of gas. NASA/JPL Most planets have a roughly circular orbit, but Pluto’s is more stretched out like an ellipse. Pluto’s orbit has a higher eccentricity than the other planets’ orbits. A circle has an eccentricity of 0. Pluto, however, has an eccentricity of 0.251, which means that its orbit crosses that of Neptune, making that planet farther from the Sun from February 7, 1979, until February 11, 1999. May 15, 2005: Nix and Hydra Discovered Pluto; Charon; Nix; Hydra Pluto and three of its moons—Charon, Nix, and Hydra—as observed by the Hubble Space Telescope. HST Pluto Companion Search/ESA/NASA Astronomers using the Hubble Space Telescope discovered these two moons. Nix and Hydra are small and elongated; both are about 55 km (35 miles) long, and Hydra is the thicker of the two, 34 km (21 miles) across. These two moons wobble chaotically because they orbit in the constantly changing gravitational field of Pluto and Charon, which rotate around each other. The direction in which their rotational poles point changes drastically. Hubble