Contact Us ABOUT US ISLAM 101 SERVICES LEARNING RAMADAN INTERFAITH PROGRAMS RESOURCES DONATE WHAT IS ISLAM? What is Islam? Islam is the largest and fastest growing faith in the world. The word “Islam” is an Arabic word that means “peace, purity, submission and obedience to the will of Almighty God”. The word Islam comes from the Arabic root word “sa-la-ma”, which means peace. So, the complete meaning of “Islam” is attaining a state of peace by submitting oneself to the Will of Almighty God (Allah or The One); and by definition, one who does this is called a “Muslim” (which also comes from the root word sa-la-ma), meaning someone who has submitted to the Will of Almighty God (a believer). Unlike the names used for other religions, such as Buddhism, Hinduism and Christianity, the name for the religion of Islam was revealed by Almighty God and carries a deep spiritual meaning – only by submitting one’s will to Almighty God can one truly achieve peace, both in this life and the hereafter. Islam teaches that all religions originally had the same essential message – to believe in One True God and to worship Him and Him alone. Thus, Islam is not a new religion, but in fact it is the same divinely revealed Ultimate Truth that Almighty God revealed to all His prophets: Adam, Idris (Enoch), Nuh (Noah), Hud, Saleh, Ibrahim (Abraham), Isma’il (Ishmael), Ishaq (Isaac), Lut (Lot), Ya’qub (Jacob), Yousef (Joseph), Shu’aib, Ayyub (Job), Musa (Moses), Harun (Aaron), Dhu’l-kifl (Ezekiel), Dawud (David), Sulaiman (Solomon), Ilias (Elias), Al-Yasa (Elisha), Yunus (Jonah), Zakariyya (Zachariah), Yahya (John), ‘Isa (Jesus) and Muhammad (pbuh), all were prophets of Islam mentioned in the Qur’aan and by Muhammad (pbuh). “Say (O Muslims): ‘We believe in Allah and that which has been sent down to us and that which has been sent down to Ibrahim (Abraham), Isma’il (Ishmael), Ishaq (Isaac), Ya’qub (Jacob), and to Al-Asbaat [the offspring of the twelve sons of Ya’qub (Jacob)], and that which has been given to Musa (Moses) and ‘Isa (Jesus), and that which has been given to the Prophets from their Lord. We make no distinction between any of them, and to Him we have submitted (in Islam)’.” [Qur’aan 2:136] Each Prophet had the same message: “And We did not send any Messenger before you (O Muhammad) but We revealed to him (saying): La ilaha illa Ana (none has the right to be worshiped but I (Allah)), so worship Me (Alone and none else).” [Qur’aan 21:25] Islam is the religion of Almighty God since the beginning of time – from Adam and Eve ’til the Day of Judgment. “Truly, the religion with Allah (God) is Islam…” [Qur’aan 3:19] Who are Muslims? It is estimated that there are over 1.2 billion Muslims worldwide. There are an estimated 10 million Muslims in America. The Arabic word “Muslim” literally means “someone who submits himself to the will of Almighty God”. The message of Islam is meant for all of mankind and whoever accepts the message of Islam becomes a Muslim. Some people mistakenly believe that Islam is just a religion for Arabs, but nothing could be further from the truth, since in actuality over 80% of the world’s Muslims are not Arabs! The Largest Muslim nation is Indonesia! Even though most Arabs are Muslims, there are Arabs who are Christians, Jews and atheists. If one just takes a look at the various people who live in the Muslim World – from Nigeria to Bosnia and from Morocco to Indonesia – it is easy to see that Muslims come from all different races, ethnic groups and nationalities. From the very beginning, Islam had a universal message for all people. This can be seen in the fact that some of the early companions of the Prophet Muhammad were not only Arabs, but also Persians, Africans and Byzantine Romans. Being a Muslim entails complete acceptance and active obedience to the revealed will of Almighty God. A Muslim is a person who freely accepts to base his beliefs, values and faith on the will of Almighty God. In the past, even though you don’t see it as much today, the word “Mohammedins” was often used as a label for Muslims. This label is a misnomer and is the result of either willful distortion or sheer ignorance. One of the reasons for the misconception is that Europeans were taught for centuries that Muslims worshiped the Prophet Muhammad in the same way that Christians worship Jesus. This is absolutely not true since a Muslim is not permitted to worship anyone or anything besides Almighty God. **Disclaimer: If you believe that there is One God and that Jesus is not the son of God, but the Prophet of God (and had many mircales) and believe in all the other Prophets of God, the Books of God (in their original form), the Angels of God, Accountability, Life after Death…then by definition, you are a Muslim (a believer).** How does a person become a Muslim? One can become a Muslim just by saying and believing, “There is no deity but Almighty God, and Muhammad is the messenger of God.” By this declaration, the person announces faith in all of the prophets/messengers. What does Allah mean? Very often one will hear the word “Allah” in regards to Islam. The Arabic name for The Creator of the Universe or Almighty God is Allah, which means “The One” or “The One and Only True God, The First and Last, The Cherisher, The Sustainer, The Creator of the Universe, The Lord of all lords, The King of all kings, The Most Compassionate, The Most Merciful, The Most Forgiving etc.” Allah is the same word used by Arabic speaking Christians and Jews as well. If one were to pick up an Arabic translation of the Bible, one would see the word “Allah” being used where the word “God” is used in English. Actually, the Arabic word for Almighty God, “Allah”, is quite similar to the word for God in other Semitic languages – for example, the Hebrew word for God is “Elah”. For various reasons, some non-Muslims mistakenly believe that Muslims worship a different God than the God of Moses and Abraham and Jesus. This is certainly not the case, since the Pure Monotheism of Islam calls all people to the worship of the God of Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus and all of the other prophets. In Arabic, Allah is unique in many other ways as well – not only has The Creator acknowledged himself by this name, but also in the Arabic language, this word cannot be gendered nor pluralized, further emphasizing the unique Oneness of Allah. Who is Muhammad? Muhammad, the unlettered man, is the last and final messenger send by Almighty God to all of humanity, after Prophet Jesus. Muhammad was a living example of Islam. He explained, interpreted and lived the teachings of Islam through his example. He was the greatest of all prophets mainly because his mission brought more people into the pure belief in to the Oneness of Almighty God than any other prophet. Even though other religious communities claimed to believe in One God, over time they had corrupted their beliefs by taking their prophets and saints as intercessors with Almighty God. Some religions believe their prophets to be manifestations of God, “God Incarnate” or the “Son of God”. All of these false ideas lead to the creature being worshipped instead of the Creator, which contributed to the idolatrous practice of believing that Almighty God can be approached through intermediaries. In order to guard against these falsehoods, Prophet Muhammad always emphasized that he was only a human-being tasked with the preaching of Almighty God’s message. He taught Muslims to refer to him as “the Messenger of God and His Slave”. To Muslims, Muhammad is the best of examples for all people – he was the exemplary prophet, statesman, military leader, ruler, teacher, neighbor, husband, father and friend. Unlike other prophets and messengers, Prophet Muhammad lived in the full light of history. Muslims don’t need to have “faith” that he existed and that his teachings are preserved – they know it to be a fact. Even when his followers only numbered a few dozen, Almighty God informed Muhammad that he had been sent as a mercy to all of mankind. Because people had distorted or forgotten Almighty God’s messages, Almighty God took it upon Himself to protect the message revealed to Muhammad (i.e. Al-Qur’aan). This was because Almighty God promised not to send another messenger after him. Since all of Almighty God’s messengers have preached the message of Islam (i.e. submission to the will of God and the worship of God alone), Muhammad is actually the last prophet of Islam, not the first. Prophet Muhammad is Prophesized in some of the old scriptures: Almighty God speaks to Moses in Book of Deuteronomy chapter 18 verse 18: “I will raise them up a Prophet from among their brethren, like unto thee, and I will put my words in his mouth; and he shall speak unto them all that I shall command him.” The Christians say that this prophecy refers to Jesus (pbuh) because Jesus (pbuh) was like Moses (pbuh). Moses (pbuh) was a Jew, as well as Jesus (pbuh) was a Jew. Moses (pbuh) was a Prophet and Jesus (pbuh) was also a Prophet. If these two are the only criteria for this prophecy to be fulfilled, then all the Prophets of the Bible who came after Moses (pbuh) such as Solomon, Isaiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, Hosea, Joel, Malachi, John the Baptist, etc. (pbut) will fulfill this prophecy since all were Jews as well as prophets. However, it is Prophet Muhammad who is like Moses: Both had a father and a mother, while Jesus (pbuh) was born miraculously without any male intervention. [Mathew 1:18 and Luke 1:35 and also Al-Qur’aan 3:42-47] Both were married and had children. Jesus (pbuh) according to the Bible did not marry nor had children. Both died natural deaths. Jesus (pbuh) has been raised up alive. (4:157-158) Muhammad (pbuh) is from among the brethren of Moses (pbuh). Arabs are brethren of Jews. Abraham (pbuh) had two sons: Ishmail and Isaac (pbut). The Arabs are the descendants of Ishmail (pbuh) and the Jews are the descendants of Isaac (pbuh).Words in the mouth: Prophet Muhammad (pbuh) was unlettered and whatever revelations he received from Almighty God he repeated them verbatim. “I will raise them up a Prophet from among their brethren, like unto thee, and will put my words in his mouth; and he shall speak unto them all that I shall command him.” [Deuteronomy 18:18] Both besides being Prophets were also kings i.e. they could inflict capital punishment. Jesus (pbuh) said, “My kingdom is not of this world.” (John 18:36). Both were accepted as Prophets by their people in their lifetime but Jesus (pbuh) was rejected by his people. John chapter 1 verse 11 states, “He came unto his own, but his own received him not.” Both brought new laws and new regulations for their people. Jesus (pbuh) according to the Bible did not bring any new laws. (Mathew 5:17-18). It is Mentioned in the book of Deuteronomy chapter 18:19: “And it shall come to pass, that whosoever will not harken unto my words which he shall speak in my name, I will require it of him.” Muhammad (pbuh) is prophesised in the book of Isaiah chapter 29 verse 12: “And the book is delivered to him that is not learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee: and he saith, I am not learned.” When Archangel Gabriel commanded Muhammad by saying IQRA – “Read”, he replied, “I am not learned”. Prophet Muhammad (pbuh) is mentioned by name in the Song of Solomon chapter 5 verse 16: “Hikko Mamittakim we kullo Muhammadim Zehdoodeh wa Zehraee Bayna Jerusalem.” “His mouth is most sweet: yea, he is altogether lovely. This is my beloved, and this is my friend, O daughters of Jerusalem.” In the Hebrew language im is added for respect. Similarly it is added after the name of Prophet Muhammad to make it Muhammadim. In English translation they have even translated the name of Prophet Muhammad as “altogether lovely”, but in the Old Testament in Hebrew, the name of Prophet Muhammad