Sign in CBBC CBBC iPlayer Newsround Bitesize Own It CBeebies CBBC on TV Search Bitesize Home Learn Study support Careers My Bitesize More KS2 What is Hinduism? Part of Religious EducationHinduism Save to My Bitesize Hinduism is over 4,000 years old, making it one of the world's oldest religions. It is made up of a variety of different religious beliefs and practices. It originated near the Indus River in India. The name 'Hindu' comes from the word Indus. What do Hindus believe? Central to Hinduism is the belief in a supreme God Brahman. Brahman is present everywhere and there is a part of Brahman in everyone. Brahman takes many forms. Especially three forms called the Trimurti. Brahma is the creator of the world and all creatures. He is usually shown with four heads. Vishnu is the preserver of the world. His role is to return to the earth in troubled times and restore the balance of good and evil. He has blue skin and four arms. Shiva is the destroyer of the universe. Shiva destroys the universe in order to re-create it. Shiva has blue skin, a third eye and carries a trident. Hindus believe that life is a cycle of birth, death, and rebirth. They also believe that the next life depends on how the previous life was lived. Match the names to the deities What are Hinduism's holy books? Hinduism does not have a single holy book, but many ancient texts and scriptures. The Vedas - a collection of hymns praising the Vedic gods. Veda means 'knowledge'. The Ramayana - long epic poems about Rama and Sita. The Mahabharata - which includes the Bhagavad Gita. The Puranas - a collection of stories about the different incarnations and the lives of saints. Where do Hindus worship? Hindus worship in a temple called a Mandir. Mandirs vary in size from small village shrines to large buildings, surrounded by walls. People can also visit the Mandir at any time to pray and participate in the bhajans (religious songs). Hindus also worship at home and often have a special room with a shrine to particular gods. Take a look at this Hindu shrine below. Hinduism in pictures Hindu Temple Hindu temple in Bali, Indonesia. Although most Hindus live in India, there are some Hindu areas in other parts of the world, like Indonesia and Nepal. Many Hindus also live in the UK. Shrine to Lakshmi Hindus often worship at shrines to various deities. This is called puja. This is a shrine of Lakshmi during Diwali. Offerings are made in the form of food. Sree Meenakshi temple The Meenakshi temple in Madurai, Southern India. The main deity of the temple is Meenakshi (a form that the Goddess Parvati takes). Varanasi Varanasi, located on the river Ganges, is considered by Hindus to be the holiest city. Many Hindus pilgrimage here to die, believing it will release the soul from the cycle of reincarnation. Sadhus Sadhus are Hindu holy men who have rejected regular society and material possessions. Instead they focus on leading a holy and spiritual life. The Mahabharata The Mahabharata is an ancient epic, sometimes called the “longest poem ever written.” It has nearly 2 million words! Hinduism (unlike Islam, Christianity and Judaism), does not have a single holy book, but many ancient texts and scriptures. 1 of 6 Sign up to our newsletter Find out how Bitesize can support students' learning and more in our free newsletter for teachers. More on Hinduism Find out more by working through a topic What is Holi? 2 of 3 What is Diwali? 3 of 3 Language: English Cymraeg Gaeilge Gàidhlig CBBC CBBC iPlayer Newsround Bitesize Own It CBeebies CBBC on TV CBBC Help Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Get Personalised Newsletters Why you can trust the BBC Advertise with us Do not share or sell my info © 2024 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.