Search Britannica Click here to search Login Subscribe Home Games & Quizzes History & Society Science & Tech Biographies Animals & Nature Geography & Travel Arts & Culture Money Videos Shintō Table of Contents Introduction Nature and varieties History to 1900 Shintō literature and mythology Doctrines Ritual practices and institutions Shintō religious arts Political and social roles References & Edit History Related Topics Images & Videos For Students Shintō summary Read Next What Is the Most Widely Practiced Religion in the World? Discover How Do You Tell the Difference Between Total, Annular, Solar, and Lunar Eclipses? What Do Eggs Have to Do with Easter? How Many Electoral College Votes Does Each U.S. State Have? 9 of the World’s Deadliest Snakes Why Is the Mona Lisa So Famous? 6 Wars of Independence What’s the Difference Between Morality and Ethics? Home Philosophy & Religion Religious Beliefs History & Society Shintō religion Print Cite Share Feedback Written by Naofusa Hirai Fact-checked by The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica Last Updated: Apr 2, 2024 • Article History Shintō shrine See all media Category: History & Society Key People: Hayashi Razan Motoori Norinaga Related Topics: Zen jinja gagaku State Shintō Shugen-dō On the Web: University of California, Berkeley - ORIAS - Architecture and Sacred Spaces in Shinto (Mar. 29, 2024) (Show more) See all related content → Recent News Apr. 1, 2024, 4:04 PM ET (Le Monde) Japan: Former admiral appointed head of controversial Yasukuni shrine Shintō, indigenous religious beliefs and practices of Japan. The word Shintō, which literally means “the way of kami” (generally sacred or divine power, specifically the various gods or deities), came into use in order to distinguish indigenous Japanese beliefs from Buddhism, which had been introduced into Japan in the 6th century CE. Shintō has no founder, no official sacred scriptures in the strict sense, and no fixed dogmas, but it has preserved its guiding beliefs throughout the ages. Nature and varieties Fushimi Inari Shintō shrine Fushimi Inari Shintō shrine, Kyōto, Japan. Shintō consists of the traditional Japanese religious practices as well as the beliefs and life attitudes that are in accord with these practices. Shintō is more readily observed in the social life of the Japanese people and in their personal motivations than in a pattern of formal belief or philosophy. It remains closely connected with the Japanese value system and the Japanese people’s ways of thinking and acting. Shintō can be roughly classified into the following three major types: Shrine Shintō, Sect Shintō, and Folk Shintō. Shrine Shintō (Jinja Shintō), which has been in existence from the beginning of Japanese history to the present day, constitutes a main current of Shintō tradition. Shrine Shintō includes within its structure the now defunct State Shintō (Kokka Shintō)—based on the total identity of religion and state—and has close relations with the Japanese Imperial family. Sect Shintō (Kyōha Shintō) is a relatively new movement consisting of 13 major sects that originated in Japan around the 19th century and of several others that emerged after World War II. Each sect was organized into a religious body by either a founder or a systematizer. Folk Shintō (Minzoku Shintō) is an aspect of Japanese folk belief that is closely connected with the other types of Shintō. It has no formal organizational structure nor doctrinal formulation but is centred in the veneration of small roadside images and in the agricultural rites of rural families. These three types of Shintō are interrelated: Folk Shintō exists as the substructure of Shintō faith, and a Sect Shintō follower is usually also a parishioner (ujiko) of a particular Shintō shrine. History to 1900 Much remains unknown about religion in Japan during the Paleolithic and Neolithic ages. It is unlikely, however, that the religion of these ages has any direct connection with Shintō. Yayoi culture, which originated in the northern area of the island of Kyushu in about the 3rd or 2nd century BCE, is directly related to later Japanese culture and hence to Shintō. Among the primary Yayoi religious phenomena were agricultural rites and shamanism. Early clan religion and ceremonies In ancient times small states were gradually formed at various places. By the middle of the 4th century CE, a nation with an ancestor of the present Imperial Household as its head had probably been established. The constituent unit of society at that time was the uji (clan or family), and the head of each uji was in charge of worshiping the clan’s ujigami—its particular tutelary or guardian deity. The prayer for good harvest in spring and the harvest ceremony in autumn were two major festivals honouring the ujigami. Divination, water purification, and lustration (ceremonial purification), which are all mentioned in the Japanese classics, became popular, and people started to build shrines for their kami. Ancient Shintō was polytheistic. People found kami in nature, which ruled seas or mountains, as well as in outstanding men. They also believed in kami of ideas such as growth, creation, and judgment. Though each clan made the tutelary kami the core of its unity, such kami were not necessarily the ancestral deities of the clan. Sometimes kami of nature and kami of ideas were regarded as their tutelary kami. Get a Britannica Premium subscription and gain access to exclusive content. Subscribe Now Two different views of the world were present in ancient Shintō. One was the three-dimensional view in which the Plain of High Heaven (Takama no Hara, the kami’s world), Middle Land (Nakatsukuni, the present world), and the Hades (Yomi no Kuni, the world after death) were arranged in vertical order. The other view was a two-dimensional one in which this world and the Perpetual Country (Tokoyo, a utopian place far beyond the sea) existed in horizontal order. Though the three-dimensional view of the world (which is also characteristic of North Siberian and Mongolian shamanistic culture) became the representative view observed in Japanese myths, the two-dimensional view of the world (which is also present in Southeast Asian culture) was dominant among the populace. Early Chinese influences on Shintō Confucianism, which originated in China, is believed to have reached Japan in the 5th century CE, and by the 7th century it had spread among the people, together with Daoism and yinyang (harmony of two basic forces of nature) philosophy. All of these stimulated the development of Shintō ethical teachings. With the gradual centralization of political power, Shintō began to develop as a national cult as well. Myths of various clans were combined and reorganized into a pan-Japanese mythology with the Imperial Household as its centre. The kami of the Imperial Household and the tutelary kami of powerful clans became the kami of the whole nation and people, and offerings were made by the state every year. Such practices were systematized supposedly around the start of the Taika-era reforms in 645. By the beginning of the 10th century, about 3,000 shrines throughout Japan were receiving state offerings. As the power of the central government declined, however, the system ceased to be effective, and after the 13th century only a limited number of important shrines continued to receive the Imperial offerings. Later, after the Meiji Restoration in 1868, the old system was revived. The encounter with Buddhism Shintō deity Shintō deity, wood sculpture, Japan, Heian period, 12th century; in the Honolulu Academy of Arts. (more) Buddhism was officially introduced into Japan in 552 CE and developed gradually. In the 8th century there emerged tendencies to interpret Shintō from a Buddhist viewpoint. Shintō kami were viewed as protectors of Buddhism; hence, shrines for tutelary kami were built within the precincts of Buddhist temples. Kami were made equivalent to deva, or “gods.” According to Buddhist teachings, the deva are said to be undergoing the same suffering (dukkha) within the endless cycle of death and rebirth (samsara) that all creatures experience. Help was therefore offered to kami in the form of Buddhist discipline. Buddhist temples were even built within Shintō shrine precincts, and Buddhist sutras (scriptures) were read in front of kami. By the late 8th century, kami were thought to be avatars (incarnations) of buddhas (enlightened individuals who had attained liberation [moksha] from samsara) and bodhisattvas (buddhas-to-be). Bodhisattva names were given to kami, and Buddhist statues were placed even in the inner sanctuaries of Shintō shrines. In some cases, Buddhist priests were in charge of the management of Shintō shrines. Ise Shrine: Outer Shrine Entrance to the Outer Shrine (Gekū) of the Ise Shrine, Ise, Mie prefecture, Japan. From the beginning of the Kamakura period (1192–1333), theories of Shintō-Buddhist amalgamation were formulated. The most important of the syncretic schools to emerge were Ryōbu (Dual Aspect) Shintō and Sannō (“King of the Mountain,” a common name of the guardian deity of Tendai Buddhism) Shintō. According to Ryōbu Shintō—also called Shingon Shintō—the two realms of the universe in Shingon Buddhist teachings corresponded to the kami Amaterasu Ōmikami and Toyuke (Toyouke) Ōkami enshrined at the Ise-daijingū (Grand Shrine of Ise, commonly called Ise-jingū, or Ise Shrine) in Mie prefecture. The theorists of Sannō Shintō—also called Tendai Shintō—interpreted the Tendai belief in the central, or absolute, truth of the universe (i.e., the fundamental buddha nature) as being equivalent to the Shintō concept that the sun goddess Amaterasu was the source of the universe. These two sects brought certain esoteric Buddhist rituals into Shintō. Buddhistic Shintō was popular for several centuries and was influential until its extinction at the Meiji Restoration. Shintō reaction against Buddhism Ise, or Watarai, Shintō was the first theoretical school of anti-Buddhistic Shintō in that it attempted to exclude Buddhist accretions and also tried to formulate a pure Japanese version. Watarai Shintō appeared in Ise during the 13th century as a reaction against the Shintō-Buddhist amalgamation. Konton (chaos), or Kizen (non-being), was the basic kami of the universe for Watarai Shintō and was regarded as the basis of all beings, including the buddhas and bodhisattvas. Purification, which had been practiced since the time of ancient Shintō, was given much deeper spiritual meanings. Shōjiki (defined as uprightness or righteousness) and prayers were emphasized as the means by which to be united with kami. Yoshida Shintō, a school in Kyōto that emerged during the 15th century, inherited various aspects handed down from Watarai Shintō and also showed some Daoist influence. The school’s doctrines were largely the work of Yoshida Kanetomo (1435–1511). Its fundamental kami (the source of all things and beings in the universe) was Taigen Sonjin (the Great Exalted One). According to its teaching, if one is truly purified, his heart can be the kami’s abode. The ideal of inner purification was a mysterious state of mind in which one worshiped the kami that lived in one’s own heart. Although the Watarai and Yoshida schools were thus free of Buddhistic theories, the influence of Chinese thought was still present. Neo-Confucian Shintō In 1603 the Tokugawa shogunate was founded in Edo (Tokyo), and contact between Shintō and Confucianism was resumed. Scholars tried to interpret Shintō from the standpoint of neo-Confucianism (a philosophical and ethical movement that emerged in China in the Song dynasty), emphasizing the unity of Shintō and Confucian teachings. Schools emerged based on the teachings of the Chinese philosophers Zhu Xi and Wang Yangming, and neo-Confucianism became an official subject of study for warriors. Yoshikawa Koretaru (1616–94) and Yamazaki Ansai (1619–82) were two representative scholars of Confucian Shintō. They added neo-Confucian interpretations to the traditional theories handed down from Watarai Shintō, and each established a new school. The taiji (Supreme Ultimate) concept of neo-Confucianism was regarded as identical with the first kami of the Nihon shoki, or Nihon-gi (“Chronicles of Japan”). One of the characteristics of Yoshikawa’s theories was his emphasis on political philosophy. Imperial virtues (wisdom, benevolence, and courage), symbolized by the Sanshu no Shinki (Three Sacred Treasures), and national ethics, such as loyalty and filial piety, constituted the way to rule the state. Yamazaki Ansai further developed this tendency and advocated both mystical pietism and ardent emperor worship. Fukko Shintō Fukko (Restoration, or Revival) Shintō is one of the Kokugaku (National Learning) movements that started toward the end of the 17th century. Advocates of this school maintained that the norms of Shintō should not be sought in Buddhist or Confucian interpretations but in the beliefs and life-attitudes of their ancestors as clarified by philological study of