Products Claims Renewals Become Digit POSP Resources Support Do the Digit Insurance Trusted by 3 Crore+ Indians Pay as you Drive Car Bike Health Commercial Covers COVID-19 Travel Home More Registration Number Mobile Number (Optional) +91 View Prices DON’T HAVE REG NUM? keyboard_arrow_right IT’S A BRAND NEW CAR keyboard_arrow_right RENEW DIGIT POLICY keyboard_arrow_right I agree to the Terms & Conditions Best Sports to Lose Weight Faster Today's urban lifestyle coupled with 'work from home culture' has entwined individuals with issues like weight gain and related diseases. If you are one such individual and looking for ways to shed extra body weight, the following piece will be a great help. Also, you have a strong inclination towards sports-related activities; the list of exercises mentioned would not seem hectic. So, let's see what we have selected for you, like the best sports to lose weight. Top 10 Sports for Losing Weight 1. Parkour |Calories Burned Per Hour- 600-900 Parkour is a new kind of high calorie burning sport that involves various kinds of movement patterns. Here, practitioners who are called traceurs aim to move from one point to another in a complex environment without depending on any equipment. This sports exercise needs to be done in the effective and fastest way possible. If you are wondering what these different movement patterns are, let us tell you about this. While doing parkour, you have to get involved in jumping, running, climbing, mantling, vaulting, rolling based on the given/chosen circumstances. It is one of the best sports for losing weight as it increases total calorie burning per minute, which helps to lose weight faster. 2. Boxing |Calories Burned Per Hour- 800 Boxing is one of those fitness trends or exercises that always remain on the top list. When you choose boxing as your weight losing sport exercise, you need to maintain a high level of athlete prowess, i.e. strength, speed, agility, hand-eye coordination. These activities are applicable both for sports purposes as well as for fitness purposes. However, you need not take a punch in return. The overall body movements in boxing help you to cut extra body weight by burning calories at a high rate. Hence, it is considered one of the best sports to lose weight. Apart from reducing body weight, boxing improves cardiovascular health, body strength and combat stress-related issues. 3. Cycling |Calories Burned Per Hour- 450-750 Cycling is often considered a good exercise option for aerobic exercises. It enables you to keep your heart rate at an optimum level with less impact on knees, ankles and other joints when compared to running or jogging. However, if you choose cycling as a weight lose sport, you can burn a significant number of calories while pedalling (given you are running at a fast pace). The more your body uses energy to pedal faster, the more calories you burn. However, the total number of calories burnt depends on the weight, speed and time spent cycling. 4. Racquets |Calories Burned Per Hour- 435 (Casual)/652 (Competitive) Racquet sports, including tennis, badminton, racquetball, are vigorous exercises that demand constant and fast movement of hands and legs when the ball, shuttlecock bounces across the court or net. Tennis, badminton is usually played outdoors, and racquetball is played within an enclosed room. All these forms of racquet sports are intense sports that burn the most calories as it involves every muscle of the body. This helps to burn calories at a great rate. Racquets is a type of cardiovascular exercise and an effective alternative for cross-training workouts. Enrol yourself in any local club where you can play racquet sports and burn calories. 5. Sprinting |Calories Burned Per Hour- 614 (155 pound person), 733 (183 pound person) If you are willing to lose weight faster, choose sprinting as it is one of the best sports to burn fat. Sprinting makes you breathe harder continuously, which increases the amount of oxygen in the blood hence increasing heart rate and metabolism. The high amount of oxygen helps to detoxify your body. Sprinting is a total body workout that helps to lose fat and increase metabolic rate for several days even if you are no longer involved in this exercise. This phenomenon is known as the post-exercise oxygen consumption (EPOC) effect, also known as 'afterburn'. Short sprinting allows you to improve heartbeat, blood circulation and raise body temperature, which in turn helps to reduce body weight quickly. 6. Basketball |Calories Burned Per Hour-576 Basketball is a physically demanding activity that helps to burn a lot of calories thus losing weight. When you play basketball, you have to run, jump, move in different directions, and maintain hand-eye coordination. As your entire body is involved in the game, you quickly build up sweat hence start burning calories. Keep in mind, the number of calories burnt by playing basketball depends on several factors such as the duration of playing, intensity level, playing full court or half court etc. Find like-minded people and start playing basketball as it is one of the best sports for burning calories. 7. Soccer |Calories Burned Per Hour- 504 Individuals can play soccer to fight obesity. It is one of the best sports for burning calories. If you play soccer two or three times a week, you can shed weight significantly. As soccer involves heart and muscle in different ways, you can pick this sport for burning calories. Wondering how? Soccer helps to build more muscle mass and burn calories as it involves slow=twitch and fast-twitch muscle fibres. It accelerates metabolism, and no matter in what position you are playing this weight-loss sports activity, i.e. offence or defence, the running and agile movements will help you cut extra body weight. 8. Martial Arts |Calories Burned Per Hour- 475-575 If you want to try something new and the best sport to lose belly fat, martial arts can be an ideal choice. There are several martial arts forms available, such as Karate, Kung Fu etc. Those willing to perform full-body workouts can select Karate. This sport exercise involves kicks, punches, strikes and works on core muscles magnificently. On the other hand, if you are willing to maintain a good physique as well as lose weight, Kung Fu is the right choice for you. In this form of martial arts, which involves kicking, jumping and striking, you can improve leg muscle and shed an extra ton of weight. 9. Swimming |Calories Burned Per Hour- 400 Swimming is one of the best sports to lose belly fat fast. Individuals can burn more calories when they run faster and cover more distance. Also, the rate of fat loss depends on the strokes chosen. Suppose, if you choose breaststroke over freestyle, you have to swim for a long duration. Thus, you can be more consistent and burn more calories. Apart from the weight loss benefits, individuals can improve muscle strength, posture and flexibility as every single muscle in the body, including neck, toe muscles, the face, is involved. Further, they can get the cardiovascular benefits of aerobic exercises without impacting joints. Join swimming courses and reduce belly fat quickly. 10. Gymnastics |Calories Burned Per Hour- 288 Browsing the internet with what sports burn the most calories? Gymnastics is the ideal answer. This sport requires a huge amount of energy and fitness coordination, flexibility, agility. Here, weight loss depends on the number of days performing it. You can lose weight by doing 15 minutes of gymnastics every day. By performing gymnastics, you can improve muscle tone, increase muscle mass and can maintain a good body shape. If you perform some of the above-mentioned lists of best sports to lose weight combine it with a healthy, balanced diet, you can shed extra body weight faster and ward off obesity-related issues. Name of Excercise Calories Burned/ Hour Parkour 600- 900 Boxing 800 Cycling 450-750 Racquets 435-652 Sprinting 614-733 Basketball 576 Soccer 504 Martial Arts 475- 575 Swimming 400 Gymnastics 288 Frequently Asked Questions Can I lose weight by practising Judo? How many calories can I burn by playing one hour of volleyball? Can I lose weight by running? Other Articles related to Weight Loss Vegetables for Weight Loss Best Foods for Weight Loss Protein Rich Foods for Weight Loss Detox Diet for Weight Loss What is Detox Dieting? Exercises for Weight Loss Cardio Exercises for Weight Loss Jumping/Skipping Rope for Weight Loss Jogging for Weight Loss Cycling for Weight Loss Walking for Weight Loss Weight Loss Tips for Men Weight Loss Tips for Women Best Juice for Weight Loss Grains for Weight Loss Fruits for Weight Loss Yoga for Weight Loss Aerobic Exercise for Weight Loss What is Keto Diet? How to Reduce Belly Fat? Benefits of Weight Loss Vegetarian Diet for Weight Loss Keto Diet for Weight Loss Effective Tips for Weight Loss at Home Surya Namaskar for Weight Loss What Is Intermittent Fasting? Liquid Diet for Weight Loss Best Sports to Lose Weight Faster Top 10 Exercises to Gain Weight for Men & Women GM Diet for Weight Loss More articles related to Health Insurance Deductible in Health Insurance Difference between Family Floater and Individual Health Insurance Cashless Health Insurance Sum Insured in Health Insurance Daily Hospital Cash Benefit Types of Health Insurance Pre-existing Disease Cover What is Copay in Health Insurance Cancer Insurance Cover TPA in Health Insurance Difference between Mediclaim Policy and Health Insurance Health Insurance Premium Calculator Difference between Term Insurance and Health Insurance Difference between Life Insurance and Health Insurance Waiting Period in Health Insurance What is Health Insurance Health Insurance Portability Best Health Insurance Policy in India State-Wise Quarantine Rules & Guidelines Day Care Procedures in Health Insurance No Room Rent Capping in Health Insurance Unlock 4.0 Guidelines Health Insurance for Diabetes Patients Health Insurance covering Cataract Surgery Health Insurance with Free Annual Checkup Domiciliary Hospitalization in Health Insurance Government Health Insurance Schemes Sub-Limit in Health Insurance Policy Cooling-off Period in Health Insurance Loading in Health Insurance Pre and Post Hospitalization Expenses in Health Insurance GMC and GPA Policies in Health Insurance Indemnity Health Insurance Health Insurance for Disabled Persons Difference Between Waiting Period and Survival Period Types of Health Insurance Claims Health Tips & Guides Food Tips & Guides Nutrition Tips & Guides Weight Loss Tips & Guides Guides about different Diseases Health Insurance Tips Health Insurance for Smokers Comprehensive Health Insurance Buy Health Insurance on EMI Nominee in Health Insurance Grace Period in Health Insurance Health Insurance for Parents of NRIs Difference between Moratorium and Full Medical Underwriting Exclusions in Health Insurance Non - Medical Expenses in Health Insurance Road Ambulance Cover Consumable Cover in Health Insurance Air Ambulance Cover What Is Reimbursement Claim ? Health Insurance Tax Benefits for Senior Citizens Why Separate Health Insurance for your Parents? Health Insurance After Retirement Health Insurance for Pre-Retirees Health Insurance for Freelancers and Self-Employed Health Insurance for Government Employees Why Health Insurance is Important for Mothers? Difference Between Inpatient and Outpatient Hospitalisation What is Restoration Benefit? Cumulative Bonus in Health Insurance Terminal vs Critical Illness Health Insurance Myths How to Choose the Right Sum Insured Mental Health Insurance Infertility Treatment Cover Bariatric Surgery Cover What is Organ Transplant Cover AYUSH Benefit in Health Insurance Compare Health Insurance Maternity Health Insurance Zone Based Health Insurance Copay vs Coinsurance vs Deductible Health Insurance Add-Ons Health Insurance Benefits Dental Health Insurance Increase in Health Premium on Renewal Fixed and Indemnity Health Insurance Maternity Benefit without Waiting Period Download Health Insurance Policy Wordings Click here for Policy wordings | Digit Health Care plus policy - Benefit illustration Disclaimer #1: *Customer can choose options at the time of availing insurance. Premium amount may vary accordingly. Insured is required to disclose any pre-existing condition or on going treatment before policy issuance in the proposal form. Disclaimer #2: This information is added only for informative purposes and collected from different sources across the Internet. Digit Insurance is not promoting or recommending anything here. Please verify the information before making any decisions. Digit Insurance Health Insurance Weight Loss Tips Best Sports to Lose Weight Last updated: 2024-03-14 About Contact Career PRODUCTS Car Insurance Bike Insurance Travel Insurance Health Insurance Property Insurance Shop Insurance Group Health Insurance Arogya Sanjeevani Policy Commercial Vehicle Insurance Super Top-Up Health Insurance Health Insurance For Disabled & HIV/AIDS Patients RESOURCES Digest Press Download Policy