Blog Login Make A Free Account! How To Sing! 25 Steps To Become A Better Singer By Camille van Niekerk Hi, future singer! I'm glad you're here. The following 25 steps are meant to be followed in order. If you have some singing experience, you may find that you don't need to spend a lot of time on some of the steps (like matching pitch, for example). But if you're a total beginner, we've got you covered! Check out more online singing lessons here. Expect to spend a decent amount of time working through this list. Each step is actionable and will take time (days, weeks, maybe even months). There's no benefit to rushing through! Take your time, dedicate yourself to regular practice, and you'll see progress. If at any time you get stuck, reach out to us on the Singer Forum and we will be happy to help! Let's get into it! Contents Set A Goal Learn About (And Practice) Good Vocal Health Learn To Match Pitch Find Your Comfortable, Useable Vocal Range Establish Great Singing Posture - And Stick To It! Learn The “Singer's Breath” Engage The Correct Muscles For Breath Support Become Familiar With Common Vocal Warm-Up Patterns (Scales & Arpeggios) Engage Your Body And Balance Resonance With A LIP TRILL Create Resonant Space And Neutralize The Larynx With A DOPEY MUM Set A Daily Practice Routine That You Can Commit To Practice The Go-To Mouth Position For Breathing And Singing Sing In Front Of A Mirror To Check For Posture, Tension, And Mouth Position Become Acquainted With Your Different Vocal Registers Gain Control Over Your Soft Palate Begin With A Balanced Onset Shape Your Vowels For Easiest Production And Best Tone Extend Your Range With SOVT's And Narrow Vowels (At First) Increase Agility With Fast-Moving Exercises Advance Your Ear Training Add Some Style Learn From Different Genres Begin To Harmonize Make Some Friends Celebrate, Reflect, And Set A New Goal 1. Set A Goal Actually, set more than one! Clear, realistic goals will help you stay focused and motivated as you continue to learn and develop your voice. A few considerations for goal setting: Make It Specific Rather than a goal of "singing really high", how about: "increase my comfortable vocal range by 1 whole step" Be Realistic If you're new to singing, set manageable goals that you can really see yourself achieving. Instead of “mastering Beyonce' and Freddie Mercury's most challenging songs”, choose songs that are almost “singable” right now, but that provide a little bit of a challenge. Singers who set unrealistic goals tend to get discouraged very easily and give up when they lose heart. Break Long-Term Goals Into Smaller Tasks Example: “Sing at a karaoke bar” could become: “research good karaoke songs for my range”, “try out a few different songs”, “decide on a song”, “learn the melody and lyrics”, “rehearse with the karaoke track at home”, “practice in front of a friend or family member”, “choose a date”, and “sing at the bar”. Write It Down It's easy to get lost and confused when you're learning a ton of new information. Return to your goals to remind yourself what you're working toward! 2. Learn About (And Practice) Good Vocal Health Your voice is part of your body. It's irreplaceable! And although it's very powerful, it's also delicate and susceptible to damage if you don't take care of it. To practice good vocal health: Stay hydrated! Avoid smoking (and being around smoke) if possible. Get adequate sleep. Do vocal warm ups before singing, and warm down if you've spent a good amount of time exercising your voice. If you have allergies, treat them with medication and/or nasal irrigation (sinus rinse). Be aware of the way different food/alcohol/medication affects your voice and abstain if necessary. For example, dairy can thicken the mucus in your throat, making it difficult to sing with a clear tone. Alcohol can swell the vocal cords, impacting your ability to sing (especially the following day). Use steam for extra hydration: from the shower, a humidifier, or a steam inhaler. Avoid screaming, yelling, and forced talking for extended periods of time (ie: talking over loud music at a concert or club). If you have a sore throat (from sickness or overuse), go on vocal rest. That means no singing and as little talking as possible. Listen to your body: if something is causing you pain or strain, stop! Pain is your body's signal that damage can occur (or is occurring). If in doubt about any of the above, talk to your doctor! There are many more singing lessons to take a look at. 3. Learn To Match Pitch First, what is pitch? Pitch is the highness or lowness of a note. Matching pitch means that you can hear a pitch and sing that same pitch back. If you're working with a voice teacher, they can help guide you through this process! If you're self-guided, a great way to work on matching pitch is with an app! Check out an app called SingTrue. SingTrue will guide you through different pitch matching exercises and display your pitch on a graph, so you can visualize whether you might be singing lower or higher than the desired pitch. 4. Find Your Comfortable, Useable Vocal Range Your vocal range will probably expand as you train your voice! But it's helpful to start with an idea of your range right now. It's always a great idea to use a vocal range chart to help you with this. Once you've determined your vocal range, you know approximately which pitches (and songs) are within your reach. For example, if you're a guy with a bass or baritone range, you'll really struggle to sing most songs by Bruno Mars (in his same octave). Likewise, if you're a soprano, you might hurt yourself trying to sing as low as Adele or Lauren Daigle. With your vocal range as a guideline, you're set up for success! Now, when you search for a vocal warmup routine or a song to learn, include your vocal range in the search. This way, you won't be straining and struggling to hit notes that you really shouldn't be worried about. 5. Establish Great Singing Posture - And Stick To It! Proper alignment is fundamental to healthy singing technique. Good posture ensures that we're working with our body and how it functions best, instead of fighting against it to force a good sound. So let's learn good posture from the ground up! Stand up and make sure your feet are hips' distance apart. If you're right handed, the right foot can be slightly forward. If you're left handed, you can lead with the left. Hips should be slightly tucked under, and check to make sure the knees aren't locked. Roll the shoulders down and back, arms resting at your sides. The chest and ribcage are tall and lifted. This is a proud, confident posture, and it also sets you up for good breathing. Last: the head. Imagine there's a string drawing your skull towards the ceiling. Your head is balanced above the spine, floating, almost weightless. Experiment by bringing the chin forward and feeling the tension that creeps in. Now tuck the chin in and bring the head back, again feeling tension. Find that relaxed middle ground where the head is balanced and free. This posture should make your body feel tall, supported, open, and energized. It may not come naturally in the beginning, but it will help you to breathe and sing at your very best. Two specific warnings: beware of the shoulders and ribs collapsing in and down, and beware of the chin or jaw reaching forward. Start your singing practice by stretching out and finding this posture, every time! 6. Learn The "Singer'S Breath" Breath is our fuel! And breath control is crucial to singing with consistency and stamina. The goal is to take relaxed, silent breaths (usually through the mouth, since our mouth has to be open to sing), and to breathe in such a way that the belly, ribs, and back all expand. We want to avoid shallow breaths, or clavicular breathing, in which the chest rises and falls. This causes tension where we don't want it! Rather, relax your abdominal muscles and let your belly expand and contract as you breathe in and out. If you're having trouble with this, try the following: Breathe in and out through the nose. Pretend you're drinking air through a straw. Lie down on your back and relax your belly as you breathe. Build the habit of taking deep, relaxed belly breaths throughout your day to calm your body and train this “singer's breath”, Note: careful to not over-breathe! Over time, your body will learn how much breath is needed for a given phrase. But don't confuse “deep breathing” for filling up to the max. If you take in more air than you need, tension will result, as your body now has to hold all that extra air back. 7. Engage The Correct Muscles For Breath Support Breath support can be a bit elusive for beginning singers, so let's break it down. Many singers (and even teachers) will use phrases like “breathe from the diaphragm” or “sing from the diaphragm” when talking about support. (FYI: the diaphragm, if you haven't heard of it, is a dome-shaped sheet of muscle separating the thorax from the abdomen.) What they're trying to get at is this idea of creating some intra-abdominal pressure to hold back your air so that your breath and body are supporting the sound, rather than you trying to push or control the sound from your throat. In reality, the diaphragm is an involuntary muscle! When we inhale, the lungs expand and the diaphragm contracts down. When we exhale, the lungs contract and the diaphragm relaxes back up. Our goal is to slow the upward movement of the diaphragm as we sing/exhale. How do we do that? By using the muscles of our low abdomen and pelvic floor. Feel these muscles working with a simple hiss exercise: Inhale with an open mouth, relaxing the belly muscles for a deep “singer's breath”. Exhale on a hiss: but instead of squeezing the belly muscles inward, gently press them down and out. Practice this “down and out” movement of the low belly until it feels natural. Incorporate your “down and out” engagement with the following hiss exercises. 12 Count Hiss Exercise Your browser does not support the audio element. Learn more about breath support and the pelvic floor with our tutorial on Pro breath support. 8. Become Familiar With Common Vocal Warm-Up Patterns (Scales & Arpeggios) Most vocal warm-ups and exercises are built using the major scale, which sounds like this: Major Scale Exercise Your browser does not support the audio element. Some use a section of that scale: 1-2-3-2-1 Exercise Your browser does not support the audio element. 1-2-3-4-5-4-3-2-1 Exercise Your browser does not support the audio element. Others jump around within that scale, in a pattern called an arpeggio: 1-3-5-3-1 Exercise Your browser does not support the audio element. 1-3-5-8-5-3-1 Exercise Your browser does not support the audio element. Vocal exercises use a variety of patterns, but the majority will sound similar to the above examples and should be fairly easy to follow. Each exercise will have a set pattern (like a scale or arpeggio), which then gradually moves higher or lower in pitch. The pattern and syllable stay the same, but you're moving higher and lower in your range. This is by design: vocal exercises train your voice in a way that singing songs doesn't. Because no pitch is skipped, you may find that certain sections of your voice are weaker than others. That's completely normal! Usually those weaknesses are due to lack of use (ie: weak head voice, if you don't use it often) or a register shift (ie: the “break” in your voice between chest voice and head voice). Keep at it, and you'll strengthen those weak spots with time! Looking to take online singing lessons? We've got the best program out there! 9. Engage Your Body And Balance Resonance With A LIP TRILL See below for an example of a lip trill exercise you can use: Lip Trill Exercise Your