HOME ABOUT LOCATIONS PROGRAMS INSTRUMENTS RESOURCES REGISTER NOW What Is the Most Popular Instrument to Play? Posted by Sarah Mace, on Jun 10, 2015 7:15:00 AM Share Photo by Amanda tipton / CC-BY-NC-ND Whether you’ve been playing an instrument your whole life or are just getting started, you know how valuable honing a skill like this can be. Playing an instrument opens up a variety of doors musically and socially. And, if you’re a parent, chances are you want your child to keep on playing the instrument they choose as kids, possibly unlike yourself – maybe you’re kicking yourself for not keeping up with the violin! Whether you or your children want to learn how to play an instrument, this list of the most popular instruments to play in the United States might help you select the perfect instrument. This ranking of popular instruments is based on several factors, like: ease of playing, cost, versatility of the instrument, and career opportunities. Which instrument do you want to play? #1 – Piano It might surprise you to know that 21 million Americans play the piano! No wonder it is number 1 on our list. The piano is possibly the most versatile of all instruments because it is played in almost every genre and can be accompanied or played solo. It will take patience and determination to play well, but once you master it, you may have a good chance at pursuing a career! If you choose to play piano, most experts will advise starting with a more traditional piano over an electric one. If your child is interested in piano, starting at age 6 is the best. #2 – Guitar The guitar comes in at a close second because of its own versatility, cost, and the fact that it can be accompanied or played solo. While the piano has been popular for generations, the rise of rock and pop music have attributed to the popularity of the guitar. You can play acoustic, electric, or bass guitar. And like the piano, experts advise age 6 as the best starting age for learning to play. #3 – Violin The violin comes in at third on our list. While it is played a lot in classical music, it is an important part of several genres. It is fairly easy to learn and you can purchase different sizes, which makes this a great instrument for kids to start out with. Six is the recommended starting age and experts also recommend a starting with a non-electric violin. #4 – Drums Although living with a beginner drummer might be difficult, drums are number 4 on our list of popular instruments to play. There is a wide variety of drums available and you can also opt for an electric drum set that will allow for a quieter sound while playing. #5 – Saxophone Saxophones, mostly associated with jazz music, come in a variety of shapes and sizes and would be a great first instrument. The best age to start playing is around 12. Choosing the saxophone would give your child ample opportunities to play in school as they are needed in school orchestras. #6 – Flute The flute makes our list and has many advantages as a first instrument. It is inexpensive, easy to learn, easy to transport, and fun to play! #7 – Cello The cello is another great first instrument. Closely related to the violin, the cello is slightly bigger in size and is played while sitting down. It is mostly accompanied but can also be played solo. It is great for beginners and experts recommend age 6 as a great starting point. #8 – Clarinet Part of the woodwind family like the flute, the clarinet is found in several different music settings. It is generally accompanied, but there is a good chance you could pursue a professional career with the clarinet. If your child is interested, age 10 is a good time to start. #9 – Trumpet As the only brass instrument on this list, the trumpet is also one of the oldest musical instruments. It can be played in brass and jazz bands, in orchestras, and can be accompanied or played solo. It is also inexpensive and easy to transport. Again, 10 years of age is a great time to start learning! #10 – Harp Although for some the harp may be intimidating, it is pretty easy to begin playing. It also comes in different shapes and sizes, some small enough for even 8-year-olds to begin playing. We hope you have enjoyed reading about the most popular instruments to play! In case you were wondering, there is a lot of overlap on most popular to play and easiest to play. Check out this link for the best instruments for beginners: Best Instruments for Beginners. Here is a quick list: Violin Cello Double Bass Flute Clarinet Saxophone Trumpet Guitar Piano Harp As you choose the right instrument, you may wonder what the most popular instruments are around the world. Check out the infographic below for the answer! Source: https://indigoboom.com/most-popular-musical-instruments/ How did you choose the instrument you currently play? What may be holding you back from playing an instrument? Share your experience in the comment section below. Recent Posts Comprehensive Guide to Understanding Music Lesson Costs in 2024 Top 10 Reasons You Should Perform In Recitals How Long Does It Take to Learn Piano? Does Learning to Play an Instrument Make You Smarter? | Creative Soul Music School Learn to Code or Play an Instrument: Which Makes Children Smarter? Need Help With Music Lessons Fill out our form below and we can help you take your next right step. REQUEST MORE INFO RECENT ARTICLES MORE LIKE THIS HOW EXPENSIVE IS MUSIC LESSONS MUSIC LESSON TUITION COST OF MUSIC LESSONS Comprehensive Guide to Understanding Music Lesson Costs in 2024 Comprehensive Guide to Understanding Music Lesson Costs in 2024 Introduction Music lessons provide a gateway to musical proficiency and enjoyment. However, understanding the financial implications is... MUSIC LESSONS PIANO LESSONS VOICE LESSONS GUITAR LESSONS FOR KIDS DRUM LESSONS FOR KIDS NEAR ME Top 10 Reasons You Should Perform In Recitals Top 10 Reasons You Should Perform In Recitals Performing in a student recital for music lessons offers numerous benefits that can greatly enhance one's musical journey. Firstly, it provides an... PIANO LESSONS PIANO LESSONS IN DALLAS FORT WORTH HOW LONG DOES IT TAKE TO LEARN PIANO How Long Does It Take to Learn Piano? Introduction Learning to play the piano is a rewarding journey that combines artistry and skill. Many aspiring pianists wonder, "How long does it take to learn piano?" In this comprehensive guide,... TEXT US REQUEST MORE INFO CALL US Instruments Taught Piano lessons Guitar Lessons Voice Lessons Drum Lessons Bass Lessons Violin Lessons Clarinet Lessons Uke Lessons Music Lesson Programs Private Lessons Student Band Early Childhood Classes Parties Camps Join Our Faculty Careers Resources Scholarship for Music Majors Contact & Location Fort Worth Location 5236 S Hulen St Fort Worth, TX 76132 (817) 290-3089 Southlake / Grapevine Location 280 Commerce St #195 Southlake, TX 76092 (817) 380-8610 Keller / Watauga Location 5633 Watauga Rd, Watauga, TX 76148 (817) 382-1959 Bedford / Hurst / Colleyville Location 217 Harwood Rd Suite #108, Bedford, TX 76021 (817) 438-0788 Lewisville / Carrollton / Castle Hills 2520 King Arthur Blvd #103, Lewisville, TX 75056 972-544-6415 Request Info Website Design by Creative Soul Music School Hey there! Click Here to start texting us! 🙂