SingBetter Home Start Here Blog Tips Technique About How To Sing Better - The Definitive Guide 1.3k Shares Share Tweet Share My name is Roger Burnley, and on this page I'm going to show you how to sing better... much better than you're able to sing right now. I think you'll agree with me when I say that it's really hard to develop a great voice. Luckily there are some simple exercises and tips that can help you improve quickly. This is what I'm going to be showing you on this page. Why am I the person to help you with this? Well, I've been a vocal coach for over 30 years. I've helped thousands of singers discover their best voice. Many of these have gone onto become world class singers, selling millions of albums worldwide. 5 Exercises That Will Change Your Singing Voice Forever Over my long career as a singing teacher, there have been few techniques more effective than the 5 exercises I'm about to show you. These are the same exercises that my star, Grammy Winning clients use to keep their voices in tip top condition. No matter what level you're at, by practicing these exercises for 20 minutes each day you will hear wonderful improvements within a few short weeks. Check out the video below for a brief introduction to this singing exercise series. Watch The Videos And Then Use The Audio Files to Practice Below you'll find a video lesson for each exercise. Watch that first. Once you have a solid understanding of how the exercise is done, use the audio file below the video and give it a go. Don't be surprised if you feel your range opening up as well as gaining a richness in tone quality. I know these exercises will do wonders for your singing, as I've seen them work over and over again every day. It doesn't matter if you are a male singer or female singer. They work a treat on anyone who is keen to learn. Let's get started! Exercise 1: The Lip Trill Watch this first and then practice the exercise with the audio file under the video. And here's the audio file for this exercise so you can practice along. Let's discuss this exercise a little further... The Lip Roll This first exercise is called The Lip Trill or "Lip Roll". You've probably seen many singers doing this before concerts and in singing competitions on TV. The reason is, it works like a charm. Remember The Goal When Practicing The Exercise The Secret To Star Singing Click HERE For The Secret To Star Singing The goal of doing this exercise and any other exercise is to be able to sing without your voice box moving around too much. When your technique is a little out, what tends to happen is your voice box will move up and down. This cuts off your air, which takes away from your tonal quality, limits your vocal range, and restricts the freedom you have. The Lip Trill Removes Strain And Tension Why does this all matter? Well, when you practice the lip trill and your voice box starts to stay relaxed, you'll notice you'll be able to sing through your range with your vocal chords adjusting by themselves to hit each note. What does this mean? It means that you'll be singing without strain or tension! It's the muscles around the voice box that cause the strain and tension, so when they are nice and relaxed singing becomes much easier and more enjoyable. Practicing The Exercise Will Help You With Your High Notes In your lower notes and when you speak it's much easier to keep your voice box relaxed. It's when you sing into your higher notes where it becomes very important to maintain this relaxed state. When you do this correctly (and the Lip Roll exercise will help you with this), your vocal cords will actually shorten or thin. This makes it much easier to hit higher notes with a full and vibrant tone quality. Doing The Exercise In the video above you'll see me demonstrate the exercise. You can also download the mp3's and practice along. Here's a demonstration that shows how to place your hands when you're practicing. You'll need use your hands in the beginning, but as you get better you'll notice that you'll be able to do the exercise without your hands on your cheeks. As you're doing the exercise a great thing to do to help with the placement of your sound is try and keep it above your cheeks. You may even need to exaggerate the sound to keep it in the area that I'm showing in this demonstration. You'll know when you're doing this right because you'll have the exercise of hearing your sound in your head. This may not happen right away, but you will get the hang of it with practice! Try to keep your sound focused above your cheeks - This will help keep your swallowing muscles relaxed. Remember Not To Push Your Sound As soon as you try and push too hard, your voice box will begin moving around, which as you know is bad. So as soon as you feel yourself pushing your sound, try to back off and make the sound smaller. Maybe The Best Singing Exercise Ever Created? The lip roll is one of the most brilliant singing exercises ever invented. If you want to learn how to sing better, this is the place to start. It helps you eliminate vocal tension. Over time it will increase your range. It frees you up. In short it begins programming your body to produce sound correctly. And over time this correct way of producing sound will become automatic to you. So watch the video above, download the mp3's and begin practicing! Exercise 2 : The Tongue Trill The Lip Trill is exercise 1 in this series of the top 5 exercises. After you've got the Lip Trill Handled, let's move onto the second exercise. Watch this first and then practice the exercise with the audio file under the video. Here's the audio file for this exercise so you can practice along. Learn How To Sing Better - The Tongue Trill The purpose of this exercise is to get your body experiencing sound without your swallowing muscles coming into play. This will free you up and give you: Better tone quality More vocal range More freedom You'll also find it easier to use different stylistic things like vibrato, licks, trills etc In short, it shows you how to become a better singer! Experience Your Swallowing Muscles To get an experience of these swallowing muscles, put your thumb under your jaw and swallow. When you do this, you'll feel these muscles come down, and also move your voice box out of place. This is what we are trying to eliminate with this exercise. Cutting Off Your Airflow Blocks Your Voice Another thing to do is once again, put your thumb under your jaw. But this time, do a deliberate yawn. You'll notice when you do this, the muscles will again come down. But also, you'll feel you will be cutting off your air. This is a big problem for a large percentage of singers, and correcting it will do wonders for your singing. Let's Do The Exercise Now, for the best explanation of the exercise you'll need to watch the video up the top of this page. But the basics are to start with your thumb under your jaw, and to start humming on a scale while allowing your tongue to freely vibrate. You'll be able to feel when your swallowing muscles are tensing up because you have your thumb under your jaw. What's With The Funny Face?! You'll notice me having a funny face when practicing the exercise! The reason for this is it makes it easier to get the sound to sit above the cheeks which helps you sing without the swallowing muscles coming down. Exercise 3 : Humming And here's the audio file for this exercise so you can practice along. This Is One Of My Favorite Exercises! The major benefit from practising this exercise is it removes your swallowing muscles from the singing process. It's also a really great exercise if you need a really fast vocal warm up before a performance. As well, it helps a lot with your tone quality and vocal health, because it trains you to make a really clean and correct sound. It Gets You Producing Sound With Much More Freedom And Ease So here's how the exercise is done. First, place your thumbs under your jaw like so. Be sure to keep your thumb under your jaw so you are aware when your swallowing muscles come down. This helps you feel when your swallowing muscles are coming down. This helps you to let go and relax these muscles. Then begin humming on the scale. Download the mp3 files just below the video so you can sing along. You may need to exaggerate the sound to make sure it stays above your cheeks, and doesn't fall back into your throat. Look at this picture to see where you should be focusing the sound. Here's What To Do If Your Sound Fall Apart If at any stage your sound falls apart, and gets all airy (breaks into falsetto) what you need to do is go back and sing it again using less sound. Doing it with less volume and less air will make it easier for your vocal chords to stay together, keeping that clean sound. By practicing over and over again, you'll train your vocal cords to hold together correctly, and then you'll begin to be able to do it at a higher volume. Freedom! You'll find after doing this exercise for a few minutes, your you will feel much more freedom. You'll also feel more control over the notes you are singing. As an added bonus, your speaking might even feel better too! Freedom = Control It's a little counter intuitive, but the more freedom you can give your voice, the more in control of it you will be. Most people try and control their singing to the point where they get too rigid, and muscles that should not be working get in the way. Instead if you can unblock your voice so you have complete freedom, you'll have all the control you could ever want. 5-10 Minutes A Day Makes A Big Difference Just a few minutes of practicing this exercise (and the others in this series) will give you huge improvements over time. Exercise 4 : Nay Nay Nay Vocal Exercise Watch this first and then practice the exercise with the audio file under the video. And here's the audio file for this exercise so you can practice along. In exercise 4 we are using a "Nay nay nay" sound on a scale that will help you to gain freedom and get your swallowing muscles to relax and release. Watch the video above for a demonstration. The reason we are focussing so much on getting these muscles to release is it makes everything so much easier. The swallowing muscles tensing up are one of the things that really blocks a lot of singers (even great ones!). So the point of this exercise again is for you to experience creating notes going through your range as high as you can get without using these swallowing muscles. Once again, it's very helpful to put your thumb under your jaw for this exercise so you can have the awareness of when your swallowing muscles are coming down. It can take some patience to do this perfectly. It's really about putting in the work. But over time your singing voice will become much better because of this work. Use Less Sound As You Sing Higher Another important point is that as you sing higher with this exercise you will ideally use less sound as you go higher. By that I mean you are backing off how much air you are using. Trying to force too much air through will do exactly what we are trying to avoid, which is engage those swallowing muscles and create vocal strain. You'll