audiotool Music Board About Manual Mix Studio Login Produce music online Audiotool Connecting Creative Minds SIGN UP - IT'S FREE! Create the worst track possible. Or even worse Let’s GOOOOO! Listen to Audiotool Music dead project 14 Tim Derry Dim Terry 1 Funk polo and pan dance 11 389 20 days ago i dont think i can do this again (edit) seb 1 EDM 2012 seb clairo 55 683 18 days ago friend (po9t rmx comp) rai. 1 Future Bass hybrid 71 1002 20 days ago Printout of Oyster Smiling Goon 1 House lo-fi old-school 71 904 12 days ago multitude hurakan 1 Lo-Fi d major calm 53 909 21 days ago tranquilizer O R I O N 1 Trap trap rap 2024 19 230 15 days ago No Love For Two CIVILITY 1 Pop indie pop alternative 22 249 18 days ago galactic seb 1 Electro looks sebosito 46 1071 24 days ago doohickey ahh beat 91.66% accurate E.low 1 Reggae itxmi 13 204 8 days ago Digital Beach [200] Followers! Axtros 1 Synthwave synthwave 36 393 9 days ago guyy type beat E.low 1 Hardcore elow rage 23 604 17 days ago A Point of no Return (Quaoar Track 5) Meander 1 Industrial meander 6 29 4 days ago News New Contest | Worst Track Scenario II It's that exciting time again! We're diving back into the Worst Track Scenario for its epic second round. This is your call to create the most jaw-droppingly terrible track the world has ever had the misfortune to hear... or even worse, if you can imagine that. But hold on – we're not asking for just any 10 minutes of thrown-together noise. We want you to craft a masterpiece of disaster: think bizarre soundscapes, cringeworthy lyrics, awkward buildups – all the wonderfully terrible things the music world never knew it needed. READ MORE Sound Crafting with Cal Lycus | Episode 2 | Mastering a track with Audiotool Hello everybody We proceed with another episode of Audio Alchemy featuring Cal Lycus As you might know Cal is eager to master your tracks by request, using Audiotool. In this episode, he provides a behind-the-scenes look at his mastering process. He shows us some basic mastering techniques that can be utilised in Audiotool to add that final polish to your tracks. READ MORE Studio Free online digital music workstation Get started now Audiotool is an award-winning, online digital audio workstation (DAW) that runs right in your browser. Without the need for installation, Audiotool gives you all the tools you need to produce music professionally and unleash your creative potential. Start making music now! SIGN UP Community driven Connecting musicians and fans worldwide Audiotool is built to connect creative minds. Share your music and projects with talented people from all over the world and collaborate on your tracks in real-time. Jump into spontaneous live sessions, or work on mutual projects. Learn from each other, inspire and be inspired. And because Audiotool is cloud based you can access your songs from anywhere at any time. With our built-in publishing platform you can directly release your tracks to the community and receive instant feedback. Get support from other producers and build your fanbase. Extensive sample library Find every sound you dream of Get instant access to our huge community curated and ever growing sample library – the sounds are right at your fingertips. Or you can browse through more than 200k presets for our different synthesizers and effects to find the sound and inspiration you are searching for. Don‘t like it out of the box? Creating your own is really easy. Beatmakers toolbox The heartbeat of your track Three drum machines including recreations of famous vintage drum machines like Beatbox 8 & Beatbox 9 will give you the rhythmic foundation that will make your tracks bounce. Design your sound Synthesize sounds in real-time Our synths ranging from subtractive to spectral synthesis will provide every sound you are wishing for. You got that acid feeling? We have got our famous bassline synth for you. So get ready to tweak those knobs. LEARN MORE State of the art effects Tweak your sound in creative ways Discover 28 unique FX including powerful mastering tools and MIDI effects giving you the possibility to create every sound you dream of. Our collection of audio tools offers all the options to route and transform your signals in unexpected and creative ways. There is also a sample editor to tweak, chop and edit your audio files. LEARN MORE Discover new music Listen to Audiotool artists Looking for new music? Listen to more than 1 million songs on Audiotool for free. Search by genres or check out the weekly charts! You can even reach out to artists and use their tracks in your projects. Or when inspiration hits you - start remixing. BROWSE MUSIC Sample Partner Pro Royalty Free Samples Provided By SOCIAL BROWSE All Popular Relevant HELP FAQ Manual Video Tutorials Board Feedback AUDIOTOOL Jobs LEGAL © 2023 audiotool.com Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy Privacy Settings Code of Conduct Contact 00:00 00:00