E-HOME RECORDING STUDIO Build a Studio. Record Your Music. START HERE NEWSLETTER How to Sing Better: 16 Strategies Your Vocal Coach Won’t Teach You “She’s so talented! I wish I could sing like that, but I’m completely tone deaf.” We’ve all heard comments before, from folks who believe that a good voice is something you either have, or don’t. But the truth is…singing is a skill-set just like any other. And it CAN be learned. And while there might be a rare few who sound great naturally…and another rare few who will always sound terrible no matter what… The vast majority of people sing terribly at first…then get better with practice. At least, that’s how it should work in theory. Unfortunately, the reality is that many singers practice for years and years without ever improving. What’s worse…many of them can’t even see it. And this happens, not because of a lack of talent. It happens because they don’t know HOW to practice. So for today’s post, I’m going to share 16 simple strategies to build an effective practice routine that will vastly improve your singing in a very short time. So here we go… Part I: Finding Your Style The #1 reason mediocre singers stay mediocre is… They never really develop their own identity and style. For example…think of the contestants on singing shows like American Idol or The Voice. I think it’s fair to say that the finalists of these shows meet the minimum qualifications of “good singers“, right? They hit their notes with power, precision, and finesse, and seem reasonably confident in themselves while doing so. But let me ask you this… How many of those names do you still remember…years after the show? Perhaps one or two. Perhaps none. Because the vast majority are easily forgettable, despite all the cheers of the crowd, and all the praise of the judges. So what were they missing? Well to find the answer, let’s compare them to the opposite extreme: The legendary musicians you’ve listened to and loved all your life, who would do terrible in these competitions. Bob Dylan is the first name that comes to mind. The reason we remember such names, while forgetting the thousands that come and go over the decades is: they had their own unique style that no one ever really had before and possibly no one will ever have again While all those cliche American Idol singers sounded more like clones produced in a factory. So in this next section, we’re going to discuss how you can develop a style of your own. Starting first with… 1. Develop a Badass Attitude Unlike drummers, bassists, and guitarists… As a singer…when you stand up on stage and open your mouth, there’s literally nothing to hide behind. The audience will know exactly who you are, and how you are feeling at any given moment… Because they will see it in your eyes, on your face, and in your body language…and most importantly, they will hear it in your voice. So if you don’t honestly feel with 100% certainty that you’re the baddest motherfucker on the planet (at least while you’re on-stage)… It won’t matter how “technically perfect” your performance is, since all they anyone will remember is the smell of your fear and self-doubt. How do you develop that confidence? While there are many ways to trick yourself into delusional self-confidence… We all know from the first few episodes of each American Idol season…that delusional self-confidence with singing is even worse than uncertainty. So the better option is to gain objective self-confidence, by actually getting good. So for the remainder of this article, competence is what we’ll address. Just keep in mind though, that without confidence as well, all your technical skills are worthless. Next tip… 2. Copy Your Favorite SINGERS, not SONGS While it sounds strange to say you can develop your own style by copying others….it’s absolutely true. Almost every great singer (or any other kind of artist for that matter), found their style in same way: By copying their heroes. Too often though, aspiring singers make the mistake of practicing their favorite SONGS…rather than the songs of their favorite SINGERS. This is a mistake because a huge portion of the best songs in music history are performed by one-hit-wonders with a level of talent that is not-at-all worth imitating. Sure the songs might be catchy, but all they will do is turn you into a human juke-box. Which is exactly the thing we’re trying to avoid. So here’s what to do instead: Make a list of around 4-6 of your favorite singers of all-time. Not necessarily the ones you respect most. Choose the ones you WISH to sound like. And also think you CAN sound like. So if you’re a man, the singers on your list should ideally be male, with a vocal range similar to your own. Up next… 3. Recognize Who Can Be Copied, And Who CAN’T While I’d like to tell you that you’ll eventually be able to imitate all the singers on your list… Chances are that your vocal tendencies will only align with maybe half of them. If you’re lucky. But that’s expected, as certain voices are so unique that NOBODY can copy them. Among male singers…the first name that comes to mind is Robert Plant. Every guy wants to sing Led Zeppelin covers, but almost no one ever does so, in a way that actually sounds good. Among female singers…Mariah Carey is great example. Every girl tries to hit those absurdly high notes…but none ever actually do. So every few months take a step back and evaluate which voices you resonate with, and which you don’t. If one singer’s style doesn’t seem to align with your own, cross off that name and replace it with a new one. After doing this a few times, you will eventually settle on a list with a good mix of voices that suit you well. Up next… 4. Develop Your Own Voices Once you’ve built a solid list of legendary singers… It’s time to start borrowing from each of them with the ultimate goal of eventually finding your OWN style. Assuming you chose some truly legendary singers to learn from… You’ll eventually notice that they have a mix of about 5-6 different “voices” that they selectively use in different musical contexts (most singers have only 1-2). Examples of such voices might include: a screaming metal voice a soft angelic voice a breathy “pillow-talk” voice a smokey sexy voice …and so on. Once you’ve identified these voices. start experiementing with them to find out which ones suit you best. With 5-6 voices from 5-6 singers…that’s around 30 different voices to play with. Over time, you will notice yourself favoring some voices over others, and gradually you’ll start to amass the go-to weapons of your “singing arsenal”. Up next… Part II: Daily Practice Techniques So now that we’ve covered confindence and style… For this next section of this post…we’re going to cover your practice routine… And how to make it up to 10x more effective, simply by following a few simple guidelines and avoiding the common pitfalls that keep you from progressing. Now let’s begin… 1. Find a Spot Where No One Can Hear You One of the biggest mental roadblocks in learning to sound GOOD, is an unwillingness to sound BAD. Whenever you’re learning a new song or technique… You’re going to do it wrong many times long before you figure out how to do it right. That’s just how it’s done. The problem is…when you practice in a place where roommates or neighbors or family members can hear you…and you’re even the slightest bit self-conscious about them listening… You’ll never be able to give 100% energy and focus to practicing, because you’ll be wondering what someone else thinks when you sound bad. This is ESPECIALLY true when learning to develop power in your voice. And is probably the main reason why so few of us ever attain that awe-inspiring, wall-shaking volume we all wish for. The mere thought of others laughing while you scream your head off in the next room is too embarrassing for most people to handle. So find an isolated spot where you can practice without being heard, and scream away. When others finally do hear you perform at full volume, you won’t be self-conscious anymore because you’ll know you sound amazing. Up next… 2. Don’t Waste Time With Warm-Ups Just like any muscle in the body, vocal cords require a certain “warm-up” time before running at full capacity. Which is why vocal coaches often have their singers do strange warm-up exercises like: reciting difficult sentences or making exaggerated tongue and mouth movements Perhaps you’ve done these exercises yourself in the past. And while they might offer some value to certain people…they aren’t nearly as effective as just singing one of your easier songs as you normally would… But in a softer, slower, more relaxed manner, with minimal vocal strain, and gradually increase the intensity as you get more comfortable. Then once you’re feeling good, move on to some of your more challenging songs. Up next… 3. Don’t Practice Over Other Voices A HUGE mistake that wannabe singers always make, is singing along with the original voice of the song thy’re practicing. The problem with this method is that you never really hear YOURSELF… Because your voice is always masked by the other singer’s amazing performance. And it’s easy to fool your brain into believing that the awesome sound you’re hearing is coming from your mouth…rather than the track. So instead, always make sure that there are no other competing voices when you practice singing. It may be difficult to find a recorded track of your song, minus any vocals, so instead, have a fellow musican play the accompaniment alongside you. If that’s not an option, just play the original track at absolute minimum volume, so 90% of what you hear is just your voice. The first time you try it, it will feel horribly uncomfortable, because you will most likely discover that you aren’t nearly as good as you thought. But it will allow you to get better faster, because it will allow you to better hear what you’re doing wrong, so you can ultimately work on fixing it. Up next… 4. Don’t Sing Acapella Another common practice mistake is to sing “acapella”, with no accompaniment at all. While it does offer the advantage of exposing every little flaw in your singing… People mistakenly believe that just because it’s “harder”, it will make them better singers. The problem is…without a reference pitch to follow… Your notes could drift all over the place and you would never know…unless you already have advanced pitch perception (which almost no one does). If you actually want to be an acapella singer, then of course practice that way. However, if you’re like 99% of singers who’d rather sing with music…then PRACTICE WITH MUSIC. Moving on… 5. Play Your Own Accompaniments In a perfect world…you would have a custom mix created for every song you want to practice, with the vocals removed. OR… You would have an entire live band ready to accompany you…24/7. In either scenario, you get the best of both worlds because: You get to hear your voice in isolation and fix your weak points. But you also get an accompaniment to follow so you can work on pitch control However, since neither of these two scenarios are realistic for almost anyone… The next best solution is to learn to play your OWN accompaniments…ideally on either: acoustic guitar piano While it will definitely require some extra work early-on…it will vastly improve both your singing and general musicianship in the long run. And as a nice side benefit, it will earn you much added respect from your fellow musicians as well. Up next… 6. ALWAYS Memorize Lyrics. NEVER Read. Surprisingly, there are many singers who think it’s okay to read lyrics off a sheet as they sing. But it’s always a bad idea, and here’s why: First, if you don’t dedicate specific time towards memorizing the lyrics without the sheet… Half your mind will always be preoccupied with thinking about what to say next, instead of focusing entirely on