Want to find your vocal range so you sing the right part and don't feel like an idiot? Try the Range App HOME BLOG ABOUT RVS CONTACT REVIEW US BOOK ONLINE Updated February 28, 2022 by Matt Ramsey 40 comments How to Sing Better: 40 Tips from a REAL Vocal Coach Let’s face it: Everyone wants to learn how to sing better. It doesn’t matter whether you’ve been on the road for 20 years or you’re just starting out. Here’s the bottom line: You can improve your voice and learn how to sing better. Learn More: The Top 10 Mistakes Singers Make and how to fix them in only 20 minutes. So, if you just googled “how do I begin to sing?” or “how do I know if I’m a good singer?”, this post is for you! It just takes some simple and effective vocal exercises. Rather than keep them secret, I wanted to share 40 proven singing techniques that will teach you how to sing properly today. For organization, I’ve sorted them into 10 main sections. How to Sing Better Sing with the “tall” posture. Learn good breath support by singing from the diaphragm. Train your ear using Solfege. Warm up your voice with vocal exercises. Sing with good vocal tone. Sing in your different vocal registers (chest, head, mix). Sing with the right vocal techniques. Sing with vocal effects. Look for opportunities to sing. Learn to become an artist. They’re done in an order to take you from the practice room to the stage in no time flat. Ready to get started? Read on. By the way, if you want to watch a great step-by-step video that walks through all the exercises for how to sing better, for beginners and experienced singers alike, check this out: How to Sing Flawlessly!: The 2020 Complete Guide Can Anyone Learn to Sing? Before we jump into the exercises, I think it’d be great to answer one of the most common questions I get: “Can you teach yourself to sing?”. There are actually two parts to this question: 1) Is everyone physically capable of learning to sing? and… 2) Can anyone learn to sound good when they sing? Let’s take the first part of this question first. Is singing a talent or skill? How can you learn how to sing in tune? Studies show that, unless you’re part of 3% of the population that has tone deafness (aka “amusia”), then you can learn how to sing in tune. So if you look at the statistics, basically there’s a 97% chance that you can learn to sing. But I have to be honest: I have taught over 1,000 students now and some of them were even assessed as “tone deaf” by their other teachers. But here’s the crazy thing: Every student I have worked with has been able to match pitch and tone after some simple exercises. At what age can a child sing in tune? Usually starting around 3-4 years old. Now, there are many people who will read this and think that it doesn’t apply to them or “I haven’t heard them sing.” But I promise you, you can learn how to sing naturally with the right techniques and instruction. Which brings us to part 2: Can you learn to sing if you have a bad voice? Many students will ask me things like: How can I sing beautifully? Can I learn how to sing naturally? Can I sing if I have a bad voice? Can I change my voice? These are all tricky questions to answer. Why? Because “sounding good” is a matter of opinion (just like some people think there’s an easy way how to sing good). For example, if you’re asking “how can I sing like Ariana Grande?”, that’s a tough one. Full disclosure here: I can’t give you an easy trick for how to sing like Ariana Grande. But consider this: does Bob Dylan sound good? You may say no, but at one time he was one of the most popular singers in the world. Likewise, I have taught some people that sound amazing and haven’t sold any records. A great voice does not automatically mean success. And success does not always require a great voice. So, if you’re asking “how can I sing with a bad voice?”, cheer up! Lots of people have found success with less-than-perfect voices. Yes, there’s a greater chance that, if you learn to use your voice better, you will be more successful than someone who is totally untrained. As proof, I have worked with students who have ZERO natural ability in their vocal tone but they find gigs within just a few months of working together. The more important question is “how do you define sounding good”. Adele has publicly talked about hating the sound of her own voice. Can you imagine? If that’s how Adele feels, it’s very likely that you may also not like the sound of your own voice at first. How can I improve my singing voice? As a beginner, it can be really frightening to think about how to learn to sing. But with the following lessons on how to sing, you CAN learn to find the voice of your dreams. You CAN learn how to sing. These tips for how to sing better are designed for consistent, regular practice. There’s no “how to sing better in 5 minutes” or “how to sing better in a week” tricks here. As with all things in music, the key is slow, steady improvement. These are all great things to practice singing at home on a daily basis. As an expert vocal coach, I want to help you get there with techniques I’ve used to teach 1,000+ singers. So even if you’ve searched the “how to sing” wikihow article or “how to sing better” youtube channels, you’ll find tons of great techniques and tips here that you won’t find anywhere else. Ready? Let’s get started… How to Sing Better Section 1: Sing with the Right Posture 1. The Tall Posture How can I sing perfectly? Well, here’s the truth: Singing with the correct posture is one of the fastest and easiest ways of improve your singing voice. I’ve seen students whose voices are totally transformed as soon as they find the correct posture. But what is the right posture for singing? And how does it work? Here’s what you need to know: The correct posture for learning how to sing singing is called a Tall Posture. The tall posture is the best position for singing because it provides your diaphragm and throat with the support you need to sing better. Here’s how to find Tall Posture: Stand up with your feet apart at shoulder width Make sure that your shoulders are in line with your hips and your hips are in line with your feet Keep your chest comfortably lifted and make sure that you’re not leaning backwards or forwards Allow your knees to bend slightly If you’re doing it right, you should feel like you’d be ready to jump on a train if you needed to. Now, watch yourself in a mirror from the side and make sure you’re keeping your posture straight and tall. 2. Don’t Lift Your Chin as You Sing Higher Now that you have a tall posture, let’s make sure that your head and neck is in a good position for singing. With your posture tall, make sure that your chin isn’t pointing up or down. This is especially important when you’re singing high notes since most singers will lift their chin as they go up in pitch. An easy way to make sure that your jaw isn’t pointing up is by thinking “down” as you go up in pitch. Remember, the goal is to keep the chin totally straight. 3. Relax Your Throat and Tongue With your head and neck in the right position, it’s time to check for neck and throat tension. Here’s how you do it: Sing a phrase of a song and watch yourself in the mirror. If you see any tightness in your throat or face, you are probably adding tension to your voice. The two most common areas of tension in singing are the larynx and the tongue. So let’s check the larynx first. In this exercise, you’ll be checking in with your larynx by feeling it between your fingers. Never push or poke your larynx as you’re doing these exercises. Instead, gently feel your larynx or voice box between your thumb and forefinger. Now sing the phrase of a song and gently feel your larynx between your two fingers. Does the larynx rise or feel tight as you sing? If so, try this exercise. Here’s how to keep the larynx relaxed: With your fingers gently feeling your larynx, sing the phrase again and try to allow the larynx to stay relaxed. In the next exercise, we’ll check for tongue tension by feeling the muscles underneath your chin. Again, don’t push or poke the muscles underneath your chin. Instead, gently take your thumb and feel the muscles between your voice box and your chin. Sing a phrase and use your thumb to see if the muscles under your chin are tense or tightened. If the tongue muscles underneath your chin feel tight, sing the phrase again and try to consciously relax them. 4. Relax Your Jaw Here’s the truth: The position of your jaw can change your sound dramatically. That’s because your jaw has a lot of influence on your vocal tone and even whether you’re singing on pitch. But here’s the bottom line: The jaw should move freely with whichever vowel you’re singing. Having one set jaw position for vowel will make you sound like a robot. Here’s how to let your jaw relax: Select a phrase to sing that feels a bit tight or constrained. Now watch your face and mouth in the mirror and speak the phrase of the song you’re going to sing. Take note of how vertical your jaw opens as you speak the words of the phrase. Now, sing the phrase and allow the jaw to open to the same height as you saw in the mirror. Don’t let your jaw hang any lower or higher than when you speak the words. Want 10 FREE Vocal Techniques to Sing Flawlessly? Download the FREE video and improve your voice today! Sign Up How to Sing Better Section 2: Learn Good Breath Support 5. Sing from the Diaphragm Let’s face it: Learning to breathe for singing is one of the most important steps in learning how to sing. How do you breathe while singing? Well, just like anything else, there are lots of techniques to learn to breathe for singing. But here’s all you need to know: Rather than taking a breath from the shoulders or chest, we’re going to inhale from the diaphragm. Breathing from the diaphragm is the opposite of how to sing throaty. Can you learn how to sing from the diaphragm? I’ve created a video demonstration that teaches you to sing from the diaphragm. Here’s how to do it: 1. Step in front of a mirror so that you can see the full length of your torso from the side. 2. Place your hands on both sides of the bottom of your stomach. 3. Open your mouth and inhale. 4. As you inhale, allow the breath to expand your stomach outward. 5. When you exhale, allow the breath to bring your stomach back in. If you see any movement in your shoulders or in your chest, you are doing something wrong. Please note: when done correctly, this exercise can feel a bit weird. That’s because for most of our lives we’ve been taught to inhale by bringing our stomach in, not out. When learning how to sing with your diaphragm, it’s important to let the stomach expand on the inhale and contract on the exhale. 6. The Farinelli Breathing Exercise There are tons of great exercises that will build your breath support. But the Farinelli breath exercise is the best one for building breath control FAST when you want to teach yourself to sing. Here’s a short video demonstrating how to do the Farinelli breathing exercise: Breathing for