LIFE PARENTING HOME FOOD & DRINK CELEBRATIONS QUOTES & QUIPS MAVEN PETS LifeLifestyleEntertainmentMusic 10 Most Popular Musical Instruments and Why They're Favorites Find your perfect jam with one of these top instruments or just satisfy your curiosity. By LoveToKnow Editorial PUBLISHED JUNE 12, 2023 Liudmila Chernetska/ iStock via Getty Images Since prehistoric times, humans have been making music using tools, and some of the most popular musical instruments have been around for thousands of years. Whether you're looking for a new way to jam or are just curious about everyone's favorite instruments, it's fun to learn a little more about the top picks, as compiled by news sources like Newsweek and the BBC. Piano: Tickle the Ivories With Versatility Alistair Berg/ DigitalVision via Getty Images There's a reason kids everywhere take piano lessons. The piano is one of the most popular and versatile instruments, suitable for almost every style of music. It's also ideal for beginners as it helps develop a good understanding of musical theory. When you "tickle the ivories," the piano produces sounds by striking strings with hammers. Besides being awesome, this allows for a wide range of dynamics. Guitar: Rock Star-Level Great Lock Stock/ DigitalVision via Getty Images First instrument you think of when someone mentions "rock star"? You're not alone if you said "guitar." The guitar is another versatile instrument popular in rock, pop, folk, jazz, and classical music. It's portable, relatively easy to learn the basics, and allows for a wide range of expressions. Both acoustic and electric guitars are favorites for different genres and styles, and people sometimes experiment with both. Violin: More Than Just Fiddling Around MoMo Productions/ DigitalVision via Getty Images The violin is a key instrument in orchestral music, but that's not the only place you see it. Also known as the "fiddle," it's a huge part in many other genres, such as folk and country. It's popular due to its emotive sound and the complexity of the music that can be played. Need to Know If you've ever listened to someone learn to play the violin, you know the value of a good set of earplugs. This isn't an easy instrument to learn to play, but it's totally worth the work. Drums: You Can't Beat 'Em (Okay, You Can) Taiyou Nomachi/ DigitalVision via Getty Images Drums are the backbone of many types of music, providing rhythm and tempo. They're popular because of the energy they bring to music, and they're also a primal part of human musical expression. If you've ever watched someone play a drum set, you know drums are actually many different instruments and not just a single thing. Fast Fact Did you know playing drums also has physical and cognitive benefits? They can improve mental health, coordination, and concentration. Flute: No Need for a Reed Patricio Nahuelhual/ Moment via Getty Images There are a ton of reasons the flute is a popular choice in both orchestral and solo performance settings. It's lightweight, portable, and capable of a wide range of tonal qualities and expressions. Technically a woodwind instrument, it actually doesn't use a reed like others in that group. Saxophone: All That Jazz Bhongsatorn Hengsuwanich/ Moment via Getty Images Nothing says "cool" like the sax - just ask all those awesome jazz musicians (and Bill Clinton). The saxophone is a major part of jazz bands, but you'll also find it in classical, pop, and rock music. It's popular for its rich, expressive sound and the variety of sizes/types (alto, tenor, soprano, etc.). Trumpet: Don't Blow It (Okay, Do) MoMo Productions/ DigitalVision via Getty Images Did you know trumpets have been one of the most popular musical instruments for centuries? They've been around since at least 1500 BC, and they're still super popular today. The trumpet is a brass instrument commonly used in jazz, classical music, pop, and even marching bands. It's popular due to its bright, powerful sound and its important role in many musical styles. Bass Guitar: Bass-ically Amazing Hinterhaus Productions/ DigitalVision via Getty Images While all the screaming fans might be looking at the lead guitar player, they should totally spare some of their attention for the bassist. The bass guitar might not always be in the spotlight, but it's often the glue that holds a song together. It's vital in many music genres for providing rhythm and harmonic foundation. READ MORE Sheet Music for Bass Guitar Clarinet: For Musicians Who Reed a Lot Quokka Family/ E+ via Getty Images A woodwind instrument, the clarinet uses a reed to help produce sound. It's an elegant choice, and it's popular in classical and jazz music. People love the clarinet for its warm, resonant sound and wide range. Cello: Say Hello to Beautiful Sound urbazon/ E+ via Getty Images Although it's not the easiest instrument to play, the cello has a beautiful tone and mellowness. It's known for its deep, rich sound that can express a range of emotions. You'll see this instrument in orchestral music, string quartets, and also as a solo instrument. Need to Know The most popular musical instruments aren't always the easiest to play. There are lots of reasons people love to play certain instruments, including accessibility (piano lessons are easy to find), the tones the instruments produce, and their ability to express their emotions with the instrument. Fall in Love With the Most Popular Musical Instruments Maskot via Getty Images From professional musicians to amateurs who simply love making music for fun, there are so many ways to make the most popular musical instruments a part of your life. Start by listening to some of your favorites or even seeing a live performance. You might just fall in love. Trending on LoveToKnow How to Find Free or Affordable Cars for Low-Income Families If your family is struggling to make ends meet and needs reliable transportation for work, these car programs for low-income families may be able to help. Keep Reading 55 April Trivia Questions & Answers That Just Might Fool You There's a lot more to April than fools, showers, and allergies. Test how much you know about the fourth month of the year with our April trivia. Keep Reading 60+ Ultimate Grey's Anatomy Trivia Questions for Superfans Think you know everything there is to know about Grey's Anatomy? Try our trivia & see what you remember from the past 19 seasons. Keep Reading How to Retrieve Old Text Messages From the Digital Grave Not all texts are gone forever. If you act fast, you can still retrieve those deleted texts with these various methods. Keep Reading 45+ 90s Trivia Questions That Are Da Bomb The 1990s are back in town like they never left. Revisit the greatest moments and most surprising throwbacks with some 90s trivia. Keep Reading 50 2000s Trivia Questions That Are Off the Chain These 2000s trivia questions are the blast from the past you didn’t know you needed. Keep Reading 50+ 1970s Trivia Questions Full of Groovy Gems This is some 70s trivia that’s so good, you can’t help but boogie to it. Keep Reading 45+ Gnarly 1980s Trivia Questions for a Game Night Rewind How well do you know the 1980s? Check out our totally tubular 80s trivia questions and answers to find out. Keep Reading Are you InTheKnow? Sign up for our newsletter featuring all the latest stories and products we love. COUNT ME IN I agree to receive email communications from LoveToKnow.com Are you InTheKnow? Don’t miss out on our newsletter, featuring all the latest stories and products we love. COUNT ME IN I agree to receive email communications from LoveToKnow.com Follow us About LoveToKnow Newsletter Editorial Policy Careers Contact Us There’s more to know © 2002-2024 LoveToKnow Media. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy Terms of Service