info@musictoyourhome.com phone: (646) 606-2515 Home About Us Lessons Teachers Testimonials Blog Gift Cards Contact Technique, Voice How To Sing: 20 Tips For Better Singing Tracy Reina June 28, 2022 If you are a singer, you understand that there is always room for improvement in your singing. Many people who sing still want to learn how to sing better, from beginner singers to seasoned singers. If you are a beginner singer, you may be unsure how to even start to learn how to sing well. So, how do you train your voice to sing? And more importantly, how do you sing better? The good news is, there are singing techniques, singing tips, and vocal exercises that you can utilize to help you improve upon your singing voice and learn how to sing well. Even if you are a beginner and just starting to find your singing voice, this guide will help break down the basic techniques for singing well and tips for how to sing better. Before we begin, you should ask yourself first a crucial question: Why do you want to learn to sing? If you’re going to become a professional or view yourself as a serious singer, you should acknowledge that it takes a lot of time, dedication, and practice to sing well. In other words – no one is just automatically an excellent singer. Even the best singers that you know can tell you that they improve their voices every day. So, if you want to learn to sing and what you can do to improve your singing voice, understand that consistency and work are needed in order to succeed. Can Anyone Learn to Sing? This is a question that is asked a lot – can anyone sing? The truth is, yes – anyone who can speak has the ability to sing. Of course, some singers are more skilled than others or have a more raw, natural talent, but if you start with fundamentals, learn techniques, and put them into practice, you can improve upon your voice. The crucial element to all of this is that you must be dedicated when you want to improve in anything and take the steps to make it happen. So, for example, you may think that you suffer from tone-deafness and don’t know how to match pitch, but the truth is there are only about 5% of people that are genuinely tone-deaf, meaning they cannot notice and accurately match pitch. So, the chances are with some instruction and proper technique, you can detect tone and match pitch with accuracy. And eventually, you can also learn to improve and sing better. Related read: Think you can’t sing? I disagree. Singing Better and Sounding Good Even good singers will sometimes ask, “Why can’t I sing better?” or “Why can’t I sing the way that I want to?” It is important to understand that the idea of “sounding good” when singing is subjective and different for every person. Some people argue that famous artists sound good when they sing, and others don’t believe that even popular artists who sell millions of records have great singing voices. Who you think sounds good may differ from your best friend, brother, or children. The idea of “sounding good” is simply a matter of your opinion. You may not like the sound of your own voice; many singers don’t. That doesn’t mean that you are a bad singer. It just means you have to grow comfortable with your voice and what it can do when you sing. That being stated, it can help to understand that if you learn to use your voice when singing properly, you will become more successful as a singer, whether your stage is an actual place or your shower at home. So – the question remains – “How can I teach myself to sing?” Follow the singing tips below to get you started, and you can quickly develop your voice skills to learn and improve your singing at home. But, you should also remember that working with an expert vocal coach or voice teacher can help provide and equip you with more information and solid technique to ensure you are training your voice correctly. Vocal lessons are also an excellent option if you want to sing but don’t know where to begin. Tip #1 How To Sing Better: Proper Posture Many people ask, “How do I train my voice to sing?” or “I want to learn to sing. Where do I start?” One of the first ways to help improve your singing voice is by executing and putting your body in the proper posture to sing. Unfortunately, many people do not know how to stand or sit correctly when they sing, and believe it or not, it has a more considerable bearing on their singing than they realize. So, what is the proper posture to sing from? The best singing posture is known as Tall Posture, and the easiest way to be in Tall Posture is by following these steps: Stand up straight with your feet shoulder-width apart Keep your knees slightly bent, so you’re not hyper-extending Keep your chest up, and you are not leaning forwards or backward If you’re performing this good posture correctly, you should feel everything is in line, and when you sing, you will notice how open and supported the sound is. You can use a mirror when practicing so that you can check on your posture throughout your singing. Tip #2 How To Sing Better: Relax the Shoulders, Jaw, and Throat Tension is a leading cause of strain in the voice. When your vocal muscles are tense, you also create tension when singing. For example, many singers incorrectly lift their shoulders or chin when going for higher notes, which creates a pull on the neck, shoulders, and throat muscles. They also make tightness in their jaw when straining or clenching their teeth together. Keep your throat and larynx relaxed, as well as your jaw, neck, and shoulders. You can check for tension by gently placing your fingers on your larynx and underneath your chin. You should be able to feel if they are tightened and work to relax them. Breathing deeply in and out can help you to ease the tightness, along with some gentle jaw massages. Tip 3# How To Sing Better: Breathe From Your Diaphragm The next step is knowing how to breathe to support the notes you sing. Most singers learn early on to improve their singing voice by taking conscious deep breaths and feeling those breaths expand your belly. Proper breathing is vital to sustaining long notes and creating a good tone. As a result, the diaphragm contracts, and you feel your lungs fill with air. It is the most efficient way to take in breaths to support your singing voice. You can test this by standing in Tall Posture with both hands on either side of your stomach. When you breathe in, you should feel the breath expanding and pushing your hands outward. The critical component is to ensure that your shoulders, chest, or chin are not moving when taking breaths in and out. Initially, this exercise can feel strange since most people associate breathing the opposite way. We were taught that when we breathe in, we suck in our stomachs, so it can seem a bit weird to do it differently. Tip #4 How to Sing Better: Warming Up and Finding Your Range Warmups are a vital part of improving the voice and a basic technique for singing well. Singing is just like exercise, so you need to warm up the voice so as not to cause any injury or harm. However, the voice warm ups help you stretch your vocal folds gently and figure out just what your voice is capable of achieving. You should warm up your voice every single day, and professional singers understand this. Of course, you do not have to repeat the same exercises each time, but understanding which ones can benefit you the most depending on your voice goals is the best way to select your vocal exercises. For example, Celene Dion shows Ellen her daily vocal warm up routine here. She starts with a lip trill, which is one of the most effective and safest forms of beginning to warm up your voice every day. The lip trills help eliminate voice breaks or strains, relieve tension, and help you expand your vocal range. Typical voice ranges are the four main types: Soprano, Alto, Tenor, Bass. The soprano is the higher range for women, Alto is the lower; Tenor is a higher range for men, and Bass is the lowest. There are other variations to these, such as contralto, mezzo-soprano, and baritone. Locating your natural range for your singing voice is done by following these steps: Create a comfortable sound; go with what comes easily Try to raise and alter the sound to a high pitch until you feel uncomfortable, and stop Repeat this by starting with that natural, effortless sound, and then work to alter the pitch lower until you feel you’ve reached the maximum low note. It is imperative to note here that you should not push your voice to go further one way or another. If you do that, you can cause damage to your vocal cords. It helps if you can play or have someone play the piano to help identify what range you tend to fall in comfortably before you start to work to increase your range. Tip #5 How to Sing Better: Training Your Ear Finding and matching pitches are essential tools for a great singer. You should have the ability to hear a note and effectively sing it back. Some people tend to do this more easily than others. Ear training involves understanding the notes you hear and matching your voice to those same notes simultaneously. While many learning to sing can hear the note, they cannot always sing it back correctly, and this is because it can be difficult to listen to one’s self. However, there are some helpful tips to help you learn to hear yourself better. One great way to do this is by cupping your hands behind your ears and facing the direction the music is coming to you. Then, when you match the pitch of what you are listening to, you will hear yourself better with your hand behind your ears. Working with a voice teacher can help fix your pitch; coaches who sing still want to help you detect whether you are going sharp or flat and provide you with the tools to adjust and match tones correctly. Tip #6 How to Sing Better: Learn an Instrument Often, students will ask how to sing properly, and if matching pitch is a big struggle for you, then another excellent option for training your ear is to learn to play an instrument. Studying a musical instrument not only helps you match tone and pitch but gives the added benefit of advancing your musical skills so that you can play and sing. Musical instruments add the advantage of seeing the notes, which can help you, especially if you are a more visual person. By becoming better as a musician, you, in turn, will become a better singer and sing songs well. Tip #7 How to Sing Better: Understand Good Vocal Tone Singers tend to have a particular style or voice type that their voice will naturally gravitate towards. However, you should understand that it is never a good idea to sing with too much breath as a singer. Breathy or light sounds indicate that your vocal cords are too open, letting too much air in with the sound, and it prevents your tone from sounding clear and robust. If you find that you have a breathy sound to your voice, here are some steps to follow to help eliminate it: Focus on the phrase or phrases where you sound the most breathy while singing Speak the phrases out loud, as if you are giving a speech – project your voice without yelling Try to mimic that same sound with your speaking voice by starting to sing it on a single pitch or note Work to sing more and use each note with that same