U.S. World Science Health Life Rankings Opinion Entertainment Fact Check My Turn Education SUBSCRIBE FOR $1 Login Family & Parenting Music Polls Parenting Kids Here Are the Top 10 Most Popular Instruments to Play Published Jun 21, 2022 at 11:02 AM EDT Updated Jun 21, 2022 at 11:19 AM EDT 01:02 Here Are the Top 10 Most Popular Instruments To Play By Simona Kitanovska, Zenger News FOLLOW 0 Grab your drumsticks, kids and get ready to rock! One in 6 parents actually want their kids to learn to play drums, new research suggests. That's just one surprising takeaway from a new study that asked 2,000 Americans – including 1,200 who've played at least one instrument – to weigh in on the importance of music education. Out of all the current and would-be parents polled, 82 percent think it's important that their child learn to play an instrument, with the most popular preferences being piano (18 percent), drums (17 percent) and violin (16 percent). But the top instrument kids actually want to learn is the electric guitar, according to 22 percent of parents surveyed. Conducted by OnePoll on behalf of retailer Guitar Center, the survey suggests that only 1 out of every 4 Americans (24 percent) can play an instrument. FRANCESCA COLLADO/ZENGER Current parents also shared that while 47 percent of their children are already taking lessons, only 39 percent have joined a school band or music program so far. NEWSLETTER The Bulletin Your daily briefing of everything you need to know By clicking on SIGN ME UP, you agree to Newsweek's Terms of Use & Privacy Policy. You may unsubscribe at any time. Conducted by OnePoll on behalf of retailer Guitar Center, the survey suggests that only 1 out of every 4 Americans (24 percent) can play an instrument — although 17 percent have picked one back up during the pandemic, and 13 percent would be interested in learning piano. Out of those surveyed with prior music experience, 37 percent said they don't currently play anything, implying that they may have given up on their instrument of choice. Meanwhile, 39 percent of respondents with music training have never been part of a group, with choirs (26 percent), garage bands (24 percent), and concert bands (24 percent) leading among those who have. Interestingly, one-fourth (25 percent) of the respondents who've never picked up an instrument admitted that they have no idea why they never learned one. The top instrument kids actually want to learn is the electric guitar, according to 22 percent of parents surveyed. In this photo, a boy plays with a Paper Jamz Guitar at the Toy Retailers Association's... More OLI SCARFF/GETTY IMAGES Twenty-six percent also believe that music education should be encouraged in schools, while another 29 percent think it should be required or prioritized. "Music education creates lifelong benefits that can enrich a child's life, including increased social skills to higher levels of confidence and self-esteem," said Donny Gruendler, vice president of education at Guitar Center. "From the guitar to the drums, it doesn't matter what instrument a child learns to play— the experience will allow them to cultivate their identity and kindle a life-long passion," he said. Compared to their adult counterparts, children today seem even more agreeable to the idea of learning instruments; according to parents polled, only 9 percent haven't yet expressed any interest. Anecdotally speaking, however, children don't always need that initial spark in order to reap the long-term benefits of music education. "I chose trombone in seventh grade because my friends started making jokes about the name of it and [what] it looked like," a younger respondent confessed. "I thought of quitting after, but my friends encouraged me to keep going. "Little did I know that choosing that instrument would give me the experience of a lifetime in high school." "The survey further substantiates that people have a desire to learn music, and this desire is so powerful that they even want their child to learn," Gruendler said. "Learning to play an instrument doesn't have to be boring or intimidating, especially if you're learning your favorite songs at your own pace with instructors who are personalizing each of your lessons." Top 10 Most Popular Instruments to Play Piano/Keyboard - 27 percent Acoustic Guitar - 20 percent Violin - 19 percent Electric Guitar - 18 percent Drums - 18 percent Voice/Singing - 18 percent Saxophone - 17 percent DJ Equipment - 16 percent Trumpet - 16 percent Bass - 16 percent Top 10 Instruments Parents Want Kids to Learn Piano/keyboard - 18 percent Drums - 17 percent Violin - 16 percent Electric guitar - 15 percent Acoustic guitar - 14 percent Trumpet - 14 percent Flute - 13 percent Percussion - 13 percent Vocals/singing - 13 percent Saxophone - 13 percent This story was provided to Newsweek by Zenger News. Request Reprint & Licensing Submit Correction View Editorial Guidelines About the writer Simona Kitanovska, Zenger News FOLLOW To read how Newsweek uses AI as a newsroom tool, click here. Trending 01 Ukraine's Devastating Thermobaric Drone Wipes Out Russian Target 0 comments 02 National Burrito Day: Where To Get Free Food 4 comments 03 Why Terrorism Is on the Move 1 comments 04 Arnold Schwarzenegger Reveals Travis Kelce, Jason Kelce Secret 0 comments 05 'Incompetent' Aileen Cannon Will Be Taken Off Case: Ex-Trump Lawyer 38 comments ← Back To Homepage THE DEBATE Marco Rubio: TikTok Parent Company Poses a National Security Threat By Marco Rubio VS Is Telegram a National Security Threat? By John Mac Ghlionn OPINION Florida's Abortion Referendum and Erosion of Voting Rights By Marya T. Mtshali And Katharine Mccabe Joe Biden is About to Enter a World of Hurt By Josh Hammer In Gaza, It Has Become a Fight of Bread Versus Bombs By Tom Hart Is Biden Wasting His Time on an Israel-Saudi Normalization Deal? By Daniel R. Depetris Protecting Election Officials Is a Racial Justice Imperative By Martin Luther King Iii And Arndrea Waters King Want "Second Chances" To Become Reality? We Need More Than Education By Michael Saine And Basia Skudrzyk Hillary Clinton Was Right the First Time By Froma Harrop Congressional Brain Drain Is No Laughing Matter By Peter M. Weichlein Local News Is Being Pushed Up a Creek as a Casualty of the Streaming Wars By Tom Rogers Marco Rubio: TikTok Parent Company Poses a National Security Threat By Marco Rubio Biden's Approach to Israel's Rafah Operation Is Simply Shambolic By Josh Hammer U.S. Foreign Policy Needs Some Washingtonian Realism By Carlos Roa Premium Subscription Digital + Monthly Newsweek magazine delivered to your door Newsweek Voices: Diverse audio opinions Enjoy ad-free browsing on Newsweek.com Comment on articles Newsweek app updates on-the-go SUBSCRIBE NOW Top Stories Warning Issued About 2024 Election Interference Vivek Ramaswamy Suffers Court Loss, Judge Issues Urgent Order Donald Trump Blasts Jack Smith For 'Attacking' Aileen Cannon Stephen Colbert Rips Into Benjamin Netanyahu U.S. World Science Health Rankings Opinion Entertainment Fact Check My Turn Education Sports Sports Betting Podcasts Better Planet Vault Mightier Autos Newsletters Unconventional Vantage Experts Voices Trending Israel at War Vladimir Putin Russia-Ukraine War Donald Trump Subscriptions Digital+ Monthly (Ad Free Trial) $1.00 Digital+ Yearly $49.00 Premium Monthly $9.99 Premium Yearly $99 In The Magazine April 12 2024 Issue Newsletters in your inbox See all The Bulletin (Mondays to Fridays) See Sample The Gist of It (Daily) The Josh Hammer Report (Wednesdays) See Sample The Frontlines (Thursdays) See Sample Israel at War (Tuesdays and Thursdays) For The Culture (Tuesdays and Thursdays) See Sample Pawsitively (Mondays to Fridays) Better Planet (Mondays) My Turn (Sundays) Sign up now You can unsubscribe at any time. By signing up you are agreeing to our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy © 2024 NEWSWEEK DIGITAL LLC