INVESTING SIMULATOR BANKING PERSONAL FINANCE NEWS REVIEWS ACADEMY LIVE Table of Contents What Is Microeconomics? Understanding Microeconomics The Uses of Microeconomics Method of Microeconomics Basic Concepts of Microeconomics FAQs The Bottom Line ECONOMICS GUIDE TO MICROECONOMICS Microeconomics Definition, Uses, and Concepts By THE INVESTOPEDIA TEAM Updated December 25, 2023 Reviewed by PETER WESTFALL Fact checked by PETE RATHBURN What Is Microeconomics? Microeconomics is the social science that studies the implications of incentives and decisions, specifically how those affect the utilization and distribution of resources on an individual level. Microeconomics shows how and why different goods have different values, how individuals and businesses conduct and benefit from efficient production and exchange, and how individuals best coordinate and cooperate with one another. Generally speaking, microeconomics provides a more detailed understanding of individuals, firms, and markets, whereas macroeconomics provides a more aggregate view of economies. KEY TAKEAWAYS Microeconomics studies the decisions of individuals and firms to allocate resources of production, exchange, and consumption. Microeconomics deals with prices and production in single markets and the interaction between different markets but leaves the study of economy-wide aggregates to macroeconomics. Microeconomists formulate various types of models based on logic and observed human behavior and test the models against real-world observations. Investopedia / Tara Anand Understanding Microeconomics Microeconomics is the study of what is likely to happen—also known as tendencies—when individuals make choices in response to changes in incentives, prices, resources, or methods of production. Individual actors are often grouped into microeconomic subgroups, such as buyers, sellers, and business owners. These groups create the supply and demand for resources, using money and interest rates as a pricing mechanism for coordination. The Uses of Microeconomics Microeconomics can be applied in a positive or normative sense. Positive microeconomics describes economic behavior and explains what to expect if certain conditions change. If a manufacturer raises the prices of cars, positive microeconomics says consumers will tend to buy fewer than before. If a major copper mine collapses in South America, the price of copper will tend to increase, because supply is restricted. Positive microeconomics could help an investor see why Apple Inc. stock prices might fall if consumers buy fewer iPhones. It could also explain why a higher minimum wage might force The Wendy's Company to hire fewer workers. These explanations, conclusions, and predictions of positive microeconomics can then also be applied normatively to prescribe what people, businesses, and governments should do in order to attain the most valuable or beneficial patterns of production, exchange, and consumption among market participants. This extension of the implications of microeconomics from what is to what ought to be or what people ought to do also requires at least the implicit application of some sort of ethical or moral theory or principles, which usually means some form of utilitarianism. Method of Microeconomics Microeconomic study historically has been performed according to general equilibrium theory, developed by Léon Walras in Elements of Pure Economics (1874) and partial equilibrium theory, introduced by Alfred Marshall in Principles of Economics (1890). 1 The Marshallian and Walrasian methods fall under the larger umbrella of neoclassical microeconomics. Neoclassical economics focuses on how consumers and producers make rational choices to maximize their economic well being, subject to the constraints of how much income and resources they have available. Neoclassical economists make simplifying assumptions about markets—such as perfect knowledge, infinite numbers of buyers and sellers, homogeneous goods, or static variable relationships—in order to construct mathematical models of economic behavior. These methods attempt to represent human behavior in functional mathematical language, which allows economists to develop mathematically testable models of individual markets. Neoclassicals believe in constructing measurable hypotheses about economic events, then using empirical evidence to see which hypotheses work best. In this way, they follow in the “logical positivism” or “logical empiricism” branch of philosophy. Microeconomics applies a range of research methods, depending on the question being studied and the behaviors involved. Basic Concepts of Microeconomics The study of microeconomics involves several key concepts, including (but not limited to): Incentives and behaviors: How people, as individuals or in firms, react to the situations with which they are confronted. Utility theory: Consumers will choose to purchase and consume a combination of goods that will maximize their happiness or “utility,” subject to the constraint of how much income they have available to spend. Production theory: This is the study of production, or the process of converting inputs into outputs. Producers seek to choose the combination of inputs and methods of combining them that will minimize cost in order to maximize their profits. Price theory: Utility and production theory interact to produce the theory of supply and demand, which determine prices in a competitive market. In a perfectly competitive market, it concludes that the price demanded by consumers is the same supplied by producers. That results in economic equilibrium. Where Is Microeconomics Used? Microeconomics has a wide variety of uses. For example, policymakers may use microeconomics to understand the effect of setting a minimum wage or subsidizing production of certain commodities. Businesses may use it to analyze pricing or production choices. Individuals may use it to assess purchasing and spending decisions. What is Utility in Microeconomics? In the field of microeconomics, utility refers to the degree of satisfaction that an individual receives when making an economic decision. The concept is important because decision-makers are often assumed to seek maximum utility when making choices within a market. How Important Is Microeconomics in Our Daily Life? Microeconomics is critical to daily life, even in ways that may not be evident to those engaging in it. Take, for example, the case of someone who is looking to buy a car. Microeconomic principles play a central role in individual decision-making. They will likely consider various incentives, such as rebates or low interest rates, when assessing whether or not to purchase a vehicle. They will likely select a make and model based on maximizing utility while also staying within their income constraints. On the other side of the scenario, a car company will have made similar microeconomic considerations in the production and supply of cars into the market. The Bottom Line Microeconomics is a field of study focused on the decision-making of individuals and firms within economies. This is in contrast with macroeconomics, a field that examines economies on a broader level. Microeconomics may look at the incentives that may influence individuals to make certain purchases, how they seek to maximize utility, and how they react to restraints. For firms, microeconomics may look at how producers decide what to produce, in what quantities, and what inputs to use based on minimizing costs and maximizing profits. Microeconomists formulate various types of models based on logic and observed human behavior and test the models against real-world observations. ARTICLE SOURCES PART OF Guide to Economics Microeconomics Definition, Uses, and Concepts 7 of 33 4 Economic Concepts Consumers Need To Know 8 of 33 Law of Supply and Demand in Economics: How It Works 9 of 33 Demand-Side Economics Definition, Examples of Policies 10 of 33 Related Terms Economics Defined with Types, Indicators, and Systems Economics is a branch of social science focused on the production, distribution, and consumption of goods and services. more Macroeconomics Definition, History, and Schools of Thought Macroeconomics studies an overall economy or market system, its behaviors, the factors that drive it, and how to improve its performance. more Marginalism: Definition, How It Works, Key Insight, and Example Marginalism is an economic principle that decisions and adjustments to economic behavior occur incrementally rather than categorically. Learn how it works. more Game Theory Game theory is a framework for modeling scenarios in which conflicts of interest exist among the players. more Economy: What It Is, Types of Economies, Economic Indicators An economy is a system of production and consumption activities that determines how resources are allocated among all of its participants. Learn how it works. more What Is Homo Economicus? Definition, Meaning, and Origins Homo economicus, or economic man, is the figurative human being characterized by the infinite ability to make rational decisions. more Related Articles Economics Defined with Types, Indicators, and Systems Microeconomics vs. Macroeconomics Investments Is Economics a Science? Microeconomics vs. Macroeconomics: What’s the Difference? A Practical Guide to Microeconomics How Does Government Policy Impact Microeconomics? Partner Links About Us Terms of Service Dictionary Editorial Policy Advertise News Privacy Policy Contact Us Careers EU Privacy # A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Investopedia is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family. Please review our updated Terms of Service.