Subscribe Now Money Home Household Finance Investing Retirement History & Theory History & Theory macroeconomics Print Cite Share Written byPeter Bondarenko Fact-checked byThe Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica Updated: Feb. 29, 2024 • Article History Diagram depicting the components of macroeconomic functioning. Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. Key People:Richard ThalerThomas J. SargentJanet YellenChristopher A. SimsBertil Ohlin macroeconomics, study of the behaviour of a national or regional economy as a whole. It is concerned with understanding economy-wide events such as the total amount of goods and services produced, the level of unemployment, and the general behaviour of prices. Unlike microeconomics—which studies how individual economic actors, such as consumers and firms, make decisions—macroeconomics concerns itself with the aggregate outcomes of those decisions. For that reason, in addition to using the tools of microeconomics, such as supply-and-demand analysis, macroeconomists also utilize aggregate measures such as gross domestic product (GDP), unemployment rates, and the consumer price index (CPI) to study the large-scale repercussions of micro-level decisions. Early history and the classical school Although complex macroeconomic structures have been characteristic of human societies since ancient times, the discipline of macroeconomics is relatively new. Until the 1930s most economic analysis was focused on microeconomic phenomena and concentrated primarily on the study of individual consumers, firms and industries. The classical school of economic thought, which derived its main principles from Scottish economist Adam Smith’s theory of self-regulating markets, was the dominant philosophy. Accordingly, such economists believed that economy-wide events such as rising unemployment and recessions are like natural phenomena and cannot be avoided. If left undisturbed, market forces would eventually correct such problems; moreover, any intervention by the government in the operation of free markets would be ineffective at best and destructive at worst. Britannica Quiz Economics News Keynesianism The classical view of macroeconomics, which was popularized in the 19th century as laissez-faire, was shattered by the Great Depression, which began in the United States in 1929 and soon spread to the rest of the industrialized Western world. The sheer scale of the catastrophe, which lasted almost a decade and left a quarter of the U.S. workforce without jobs, threatening the economic and political stability of many countries, was sufficient to cause a paradigm shift in mainstream macroeconomic thinking, including a reevaluation of the belief that markets are self-correcting. The theoretical foundations for that change were laid in 1935–36, when the British economist John Maynard Keynes published his monumental work The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money. Keynes argued that most of the adverse effects of the Great Depression could have been avoided had governments acted to counter the depression by boosting spending through fiscal policy. Keynes thus ushered in a new era of macroeconomic thought that viewed the economy as something that the government should actively manage. Economists such as Paul Samuelson, Franco Modigliani, James Tobin, Robert Solow, and many others adopted and expanded upon Keynes’s ideas, and as a result the Keynesian school of economics was born. In contrast to the hands-off approach of classical economists, the Keynesians argued that governments have a duty to combat recessions. Although the ups and downs of the business cycle cannot be completely avoided, they can be tamed by timely intervention. At times of economic crisis, the economy is crippled because there is almost no demand for anything. As businesses’ sales decline, they begin laying off more workers, which causes a further reduction in income and demand, resulting in a prolonged recessionary cycle. Keynesians argued that, because it controls tax revenues, the government has the means to generate demand simply by increasing spending on goods and services during such times of hardship. Monetarism In the 1950s the first challenge to the Keynesian school of thought came from the monetarists, who were led by the influential University of Chicago economist Milton Friedman. Friedman proposed an alternative explanation of the Great Depression: he argued that what had started as a recession was turned into a prolonged depression because of the disastrous monetary policies followed by the Federal Reserve System (the central bank of the United States). If the Federal Reserve had started to increase the money supply early on, instead of doing just the opposite, the recession could have been effectively tamed before it got out of control. Over time, Friedman’s ideas were refined and came to be known as monetarism. In contrast to the Keynesian strategy of boosting demand through fiscal policy, monetarists favoured controlled increases in the money supply as a means of fighting off recesssions. Beyond that, the government should avoid intervening in free markets and the rest of the economy, according to monetarists. Later developments A second challenge to the Keynesian school arose in the 1970s, when the American economist Robert E. Lucas, Jr., laid the foundations of what came to be known as the New Classical school of thought in economics. Lucas’s key introduced the rational-expectations hypothesis. As opposed to the ideas in earlier Keynesian and monetarist models that viewed the individual decision makers in the economy as shortsighted and backward-looking, Lucas argued that decision makers, insofar as they are rational, do not base their decisions solely on current and past data; they also form expectations about the future on the basis of a vast array of information available to them. That fact implies that a change in monetary policy, if it has been predicted by rational agents, will have no effect on real variables such as output and the unemployment rate, because the agents will have acted upon the implications of such a policy even before it is implemented. As a result, predictable changes in monetary policy will result in changes in nominal variables such as prices and wages but will not have any real effects. Following Lucas’s pioneering work, economists including Finn E. Kydland and Edward C. Prescott developed rigorous macroeconomic models to explain the fluctuations of the business cycle, which came to be known in the macroeconomic literature as real-business-cycle (RBC) models. RBC models were based on strong mathematical foundations and utilized Lucas’s idea of rational expectations. An important outcome of the RBC models was that they were able to explain macroeconomic fluctuations as the product of a myriad of external and internal shocks (unpredictable events that hit the economy). Primarily, they argued that shocks that result from changes in technology can account for the majority of the fluctuations in the business cycle. The tendency of RBC models to overemphasize technology-driven fluctuations as the primary cause of business cycles and to underemphasize the role of monetary and fiscal policy led to the development of a new Keynesian response in the 1980s. New Keynesians, including John B. Taylor and Stanley Fischer, adopted the rigorous modeling approach introduced by Kydland and Prescott in the RBC literature but expanded it by altering some key underlying assumptions. Previous models had relied on the fact that nominal variables such as prices and wages are flexible and respond very quickly to changes in supply and demand. However, in the real world, most wages and many prices are locked in by contractual agreements. That fact introduces “stickiness,” or resistance to change, in those economic variables. Because wages and prices tend to be sticky, economic decision makers may react to macroeconomic events by altering other variables. For example, if wages are sticky, businesses will find themselves laying off more workers than they would in an unrealistic environment in which every employee’s salary could be cut in half. Introducing market imperfections such as wage and price stickiness helped Taylor and Fischer to build macroeconomic models that represented the business cycle more accurately. In particular, they were able to show that in a world of market imperfections such as stickiness, monetary policy will have a direct impact on output and on employment in the short run, until enough time has passed for wages and prices to adjust. Therefore, central banks that control the supply of money can very well influence the business cycle in the short run. In the long run, however, the imperfections become less binding, as contracts can be renegotiated, and monetary policy can influence only prices. Following the new Keynesian revolution, macroeconomists seemed to reach a consensus that monetary policy is effective in the short run and can be used as a tool to tame business cycles. Many other macroeconomic models were developed to measure the extent to which monetary policy can influence output. More recently, the impact of the financial crisis of 2007–08 and the Great Recession that followed it, coupled with the fact that many governments adopted a very Keynesian response to those events, brought about a revival of interest in the new Keynesian approach to macroeconomics, which seemed likely to lead to improved theories and better macroeconomic models in the future. Peter Bondarenko Britannica Money Household Finance Investing Retirement History & Theory About Us Privacy Policy Terms & Conditions © 2024 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. Update Privacy Preferences