Stay Connected Recent Postings Calendar Publications Site Map A-Z index Careers FAQs Videos Contact Search Submit Search Button Advanced Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System The Federal Reserve, the central bank of the United States, provides the nation with a safe, flexible, and stable monetary and financial system. About the Fed News & Events Monetary Policy Supervision & Regulation Financial Stability Payment Systems Economic Research Data Consumers & Communities Home FAQs Economy, Jobs, and Prices FAQs Share RSS Most Frequently Asked Questions About the Fed Banking and the Financial System Money, Interest Rates, and Monetary Policy Credit, Loans, and Mortgages Currency and Coin Economy, Jobs, and Prices Federal Open Market Committee Regulations All Questions Have A Question? Ask Us What is macroeconomics? Macroeconomics is the study of whole economies--the part of economics concerned with large-scale or general economic factors and how they interact in economies. The Federal Reserve closely examines macroeconomics because its goals--maximum sustainable employment and stable inflation--are measured and achieved on an economywide level, not on an individual level. Macroeconomists study such questions as: What makes the business cycle fluctuate; what makes economic growth go up and down; how are prices determined; what is the rate of inflation, and what determines it; what is productivity growth; and what are the determinants of productivity? Importantly, macroeconomists also study the role government has in determining the pace of growth, the long-run rate of potential output in an economy, and the inflation rate. The Fed cares about macroeconomics because its goals are determined and defined in macroeconomic concepts: Stable inflation or stable prices and maximum employment are measured and achieved on an economywide, macroeconomic level, not at an individual level. Because the Fed's goals are macroeconomic goals, it often thinks in terms of macroeconomics. Fed FAQ: What is macroeconomics? Last Update: October 19, 2017 BOARD OF GOVERNORS of the FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM About the Fed News & Events Monetary Policy Supervision & Regulation Financial Stability Payment Systems Economic Research Data Consumers & Communities TOOLS AND INFORMATION Contact Publications Freedom of Information (FOIA) Office of Inspector General Budget & Performance | Audit No FEAR Act Español Website Policies | Privacy Program Accessibility STAY CONNECTED Link to Federal Reserve Facebook Page Link to Federal Reserve Twitter Page Link to Federal Reserve YouTube Page Link to Federal Reserve Flickr Page Federal Reserve LinkedIn Page Subscribe to RSS Subscribe to Email BOARD OF GOVERNORS of the FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM 20th Street and Constitution Avenue N.W., Washington, DC 20551