INVESTING SIMULATOR BANKING PERSONAL FINANCE NEWS REVIEWS ACADEMY LIVE Table of Contents Overview Gross Profit Net Income Key Differences Limitations of Both Operating Profit Users of Gross Profit vs. Net Income Examples FAQs The Bottom Line CORPORATE FINANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS: BALANCE, INCOME, CASH FLOW, AND EQUITY Gross Profit vs. Net Income: What's the Difference? By CHRIS B. MURPHY Updated February 15, 2024 Reviewed by ANDY SMITH Fact checked by YARILET PEREZ Virojt Changyencham / Getty Images Gross Profit vs. Net Income: An Overview Gross profit represents the income or profit remaining after production costs have been subtracted from revenue. Net income is the profit that remains after all expenses and costs, such as taxes, have been subtracted from revenue. Revenue is the amount of income generated from the sale of a company's goods and services. Both gross profit and net income are critical profitability metrics for any company. Gross profit helps investors determine how much profit a company earns from producing and selling its goods and services. Gross profit is sometimes referred to as gross income. Net income—also called net profit—helps investors determine a company's overall profitability, which reflects how effectively a company has been managed. Understanding the differences between gross profit and net income can help investors determine whether a company is earning a profit and, if not, where the company is losing money. KEY TAKEAWAYS Gross profit refers to a company's profits after subtracting the costs of producing and distributing its products. Gross profit determines how well a company can earn a profit while managing its production and labor costs. Net income indicates a company's profit after all its expenses have been deducted from revenues. Net income is an all-inclusive metric for profitability and provides insight into how well the management team runs all aspects of the business. Net income is often referred to as the "bottom line." Gross Profit Gross profit, operating profit, and net income refer to a company's earnings. However, each one represents profit at different phases of the production and earnings process. Gross profit is a company's profits earned after subtracting the costs of producing and selling its products—called the cost of goods sold (COGS). Gross profit provides insight into how efficiently a company manages its production costs, such as labor and supplies, to produce income from the sale of its goods and services. The gross profit for a company is calculated by subtracting the cost of goods sold for the accounting period from its total revenue. Revenue Revenue is the total amount earned from sales for a particular period, such as one quarter. Revenue is sometimes listed as net sales because it may include discounts and deductions from returned or damaged merchandise. For example, companies in the retail industry often report net sales as their revenue figure. The merchandise returned by their customers is subtracted from total revenue. Revenue is often referred to as "the top line" number since it is situated at the top of the income statement. Cost of Goods Sold (COGS) Cost of goods sold refers to the direct costs involved in producing a company's goods. COGS typically includes the following: Direct materials, such as raw materials and inventory Direct labor, such as wages for production workers Equipment costs used in production Repair costs for equipment Utilities for production facilities Shipping costs We can see from the COGS items listed above that gross profit mainly includes variable costs—or the costs that fluctuate depending on production output. Typically, gross profit doesn't include fixed costs, which are the costs incurred regardless of the production output. For example, some fixed costs are salaries (but not wages), rent, utilities, and insurance. However, some companies might assign a portion of their fixed costs used in production and report it based on each unit produced—called absorption costing. For example, say a manufacturing plant produced 5,000 automobiles in one quarter, and the company paid $15,000 in rent for the building. Under absorption costing, $3 in costs would be assigned to each automobile produced. How to Calculate Gross Profit Gross profit is calculated by subtracting the cost of goods sold from a company's revenue or net sales, as shown below: Gross profit=Net sales−COGS Net Income Net income is synonymous with a company's profit for the accounting period. In other words, net income includes all of the costs and expenses that a company incurs, which are subtracted from revenue. Net income is often called "the bottom line" due to its positioning at the bottom of the income statement. Although many items can be listed on a company's income statement, depending on the company's industry, usually net income is derived by subtracting the following expenses from revenue: Operating expenses Interest on debt and loans Overhead or selling, general, and administrative expense (SG&A) Income taxes Depreciation, which is the allocation of the costs of fixed assets, such as equipment, over their useful life or life expectancy Additional income sources are also included in net income. For example, companies often invest their cash in short-term investments, which is considered a form of income. Also, proceeds from the sale of assets are considered income. How to Calculate Net Income As stated earlier, net income is the result of subtracting all expenses and costs from revenue while also adding income from other sources. Depending on the industry, a company could have multiple sources of income besides revenue and various types of expenses. Some of those income sources or costs could be listed as separate line items on the income statement. For example, a company in the manufacturing industry would likely have COGS listed. In contrast, a company in the service industry would not have COGS, instead, their costs might be listed under operating expenses. The general formula for net income could be expressed as: Net Income=Total Revenue−Total Expenses A more detailed formula could be expressed as: Net Income=GP−OE−OBE−T−IoD+OI where: GP=Gross profit OE=Operating expenses OBE=Other business expenses T=Taxes IoD=Interest on Debt OI∣=Other income Net Income Example Assume a company generated $1 million in revenue and had the following costs and other income: Cost of goods sold of $600,000 Operating expenses of $200,000 Debt payments of $10,000 Tax payments of $5,000 Interest income of $8,000 Net income would equal $193,000 ($1,000,000 - $600,000 - $200,000 - $10,000 - $5,000 + $8,000). Key Differences Gross profit assesses a company's ability to earn a profit while managing its production and labor costs. As a result, it is an important metric in determining why a company's profits are increasing or decreasing by looking at sales, production costs, labor costs, and productivity. If a company reports an increase in revenue, but it's more than offset by an increase in production costs, such as labor, the gross profit will be lower for that period. For example, if a company didn't hire enough production workers for its busy season, it would lead to more overtime pay for its existing workers. The result would be higher labor costs and an erosion of gross profitability. However, using gross profit as an overall profitability metric would be incomplete since it doesn't include all the other costs involved in running the company. On the other hand, net income represents the profit from all aspects of a company's business operations. As a result, net income is more inclusive than gross profit and can provide insight into the management team's effectiveness. For example, a company might increase its gross profit while borrowing too much. The additional interest expense for servicing more debt could reduce net income despite the company's successful sales and production efforts. Limitations of Gross Profit and Net Income Gross profit is not a very useful metric on its own. Net income is far more helpful in determining the financial position of a business. But even net income is limited in that it is only useful for evaluating one company's performance from year to year. Comparing the net incomes of two different businesses doesn't tell you much either, even if they are in the same industry. It merely tells you which one generated more income according to how that company accounts for its expenses. Net income can be misleading—non-cash expenses are not included in its calculation. When these are subtracted, net income can be drastically reduced. Operating Profit, Gross Profit, and Net Income It's important to note that gross profit and net income are just two of the profitability metrics available to determine how well a company is performing. For example, operating profit is a company's profit before interest and taxes are deducted, which is why it's referred to as earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT). However, when calculating operating profit, the company's operating expenses are subtracted from gross profit. Operating expenses include overhead costs, such as salaries, licensing costs, or administrative activities. Like gross profit, operating profit measures profitability by taking a slice or portion of a company's income statement, while net income includes all components of the income statement. If gross profit is positive for the quarter, it doesn't necessarily mean a company is profitable. For example, a company could be saddled with too much debt, resulting in high interest expenses. These can wipe out gross profit and lead to a net loss (or negative net income). Users of Gross Profit vs. Net Income In many cases, the primary difference between gross profit and net income is the different user bases and their intentions with the information. Business Owners/Management Business owners and managers use gross profit information to assess the profitability of their core business operations. Though business owners use net income, select department leads will be more specifically interested in how the actual product manufacturing and sales perform without considering administrative costs. Investors Net income is an important metric that investors use to assess a company's profitability and growth potential. If a company does not have a positive net income, investors may not be interested. Even if a company has positive gross profit, investors are primarily interested in knowing what net income will be generated and what potential future dividend distributions (from net income, not gross profit) may be returned to them. Lenders and Banks Lenders and financial institutions use net income information to assess a company's creditworthiness and to make lending decisions. As a result, banks often require a company to provide an income statement (and often a multi-year income statement) before issuing credit. Though the bank may underwrite based on the gross profit of primary product lines, banks are most interested in seeing net cash flow after all expenses (especially interest). Tax Authorities Governments don't charge taxes on gross profit. Federal, state, and local taxes are often assessed after all expenses have been considered. Though certain tax credits or deductions may closely relate to gross profit, government entities are more interested in a company's net income when assessing tax. Gross Profit vs. Net Income Examples In most cases, companies report gross profit and net income as part of their externally published financial statements. Consider the image below, which shows Best Buy's income statement for the fiscal years ending in 2021, 2022, and 2023. 1 For fiscal year 2023, the company reported $46.3 billion in revenue and had a cost of sales of $36.4 billion. Therefore, as specified in its financial statements, the company had a gross profit of $9.9 billion. 1 Looking further down the financial statements, you'll notice that's a far cry from the $1.4 billion of net income (earnings) the company reports. Though most of this difference is due to selling, general, and administrative (SG&A) expenses, Best Buy also paid $370 million of income tax. 1 In a different example, Macy's reported all components needed as part of the Q3 2023 report for the period ending Oct. 28, 2023. However, the company's consolidated statement of income does not explicitly state gross profit. 2 Analysts must calculate that on their own, which will be the difference in total revenue ($5.04 billion) and the cost of sales ($2.90 billion), for a gross profit of $2.14 billion. 2 As seen before with Best Buy, Macy's gross profit of $2.14 billion dramatically differs from its net income of $43 million, due to SG&A costs, interest expenses, impairment and restructuring costs, and income taxes. 2 What Is Gross Income? Gross income or gross profit represents the revenue remaining after the costs of