Credit cards Banking Home Loans Insurance Personal finance Investing Small business Taxes SIGN IN SIGN UP Pondering your next move? Get our best articles about investing sent to you. Continue with Apple or continue with email By signing up, I agree to NerdWallet's Terms of Service and Privacy Policy. INVESTING HOW TO INVEST IN STOCKS Advertiser disclosure How To Invest in Stocks Learn how to invest in stocks, including how to select a brokerage account and research stock market investments. By Chris Davis and Sam Taube Updated Feb 8, 2024 Edited by Erica Corbin Reviewed by Michael Randall Many or all of the products featured here are from our partners who compensate us. This influences which products we write about and where and how the product appears on a page. However, this does not influence our evaluations. Our opinions are our own. Here is a list of our partners and here's how we make money. The investing information provided on this page is for educational purposes only. NerdWallet, Inc. does not offer advisory or brokerage services, nor does it recommend or advise investors to buy or sell particular stocks, securities or other investments. FOLLOW THE WRITERS Nerdy takeaways Investing in stocks means buying shares of ownership in a public company. Those shares are called stock. If a stock you own becomes more valuable, you could earn a profit if you decide to sell it to another investor. Most people invest in stocks online, through a brokerage account. You can also purchase funds, which hold many different stocks within one investment. MORE LIKE THISInvestingStocks When you invest in a stock, you’re hoping the company grows and performs well over time. That's how you end up making money. One of the best ways for beginners to learn how to invest in stocks is to put money in an online investment account and purchase stocks from there. You don't have to have a lot of money to start investing. Many brokerages allow you to open an account with $0, and then you just have to purchase stock. Some brokers also offer paper trading, which lets you learn how to buy and sell with stock market simulators before you invest any real money. » Don't have a brokerage account? Learn what it is and how to open one. ADVERTISEMENT Charles Schwab Interactive Brokers IBKR Lite J.P. Morgan Self-Directed Investing NerdWallet rating 4.9/5 NerdWallet rating 5.0/5 NerdWallet rating 4.1/5 Fees $0 per online equity trade Fees $0 per trade Fees $0 per trade Account minimum $0 Account minimum $0 Account minimum $0 Promotion None no promotion available at this time Promotion None no promotion available at this time Promotion Get up to $700 when you open and fund a J.P. Morgan Self-Directed Investing account with qualifying new money. LEARN MORE LEARN MORE LEARN MORE How to invest in stocks in 6 steps To invest in stocks, open an online brokerage account, add money to the account, and purchase stocks or stock-based funds from there. You can also invest in stocks through a robo-advisor or a financial advisor. » Ready to invest? Check out the best online brokers for stock trading If you're ready to invest in stocks yourself, this six-step process may help you get started. 1. Decide how you want to invest in the stock market There are several ways to approach stock investing. Choose the option below that best how hands-on you'd like to be. A. "I'd like to choose stocks and stock funds on my own." Keep reading. This article breaks down how to choose the right account for your needs and how to compare stock investments. » Learn how to choose a brokerage account B. "I'd like an expert to manage the process for me." You may be a good candidate for a robo-advisor, a service that invests your money for you for a small fee. Virtually all of the major brokerage firms and many independent advisors offer these services. » View our picks for the best robo-advisors C. “I’d like to start investing in my workplace 401(k).” This is one of the most common ways for beginners to start investing. This may be a great option for most people who have access to an employer-sponsored 401(k) because many plans offer a match. Employer matches are basically free money: If your employer offers a 4% match and you make $100,000 a year, if you contribute $4,000 to your 401(k) so will your employer. That means you get $4,000 for free. » Learn more about 401(k) plans 2. Choose an investment account Once you know how you want to invest, you're ready to shop for an investment account, also known as a brokerage account. There are several types of investment accounts, and it's a good idea to figure out which account is right for you. For example, a Roth IRA comes with significant tax benefits while a standard brokerage account does not. For those who would like a little help, opening an investment account through a robo-advisor is a sensible option. We break down both processes below. Keep in mind, an investment account is just an account, it's not an investment. You have to add money to it and then purchase investments from there in order to have your money grow in value. » Check out our roundup of the best online brokerages for stock trading The DIY option: opening an investment account An online investment account likely offers your quickest and least expensive path to buying stocks, funds and a variety of other investments. With a broker, you can open an individual retirement account, also known as an IRA, or you can open a taxable brokerage account if you’re already saving adequately for retirement in an employer 401(k) or other plan. » View our top picks for IRA accounts We have a guide to opening a brokerage account if you need a deep dive. You'll want to evaluate brokers based on factors such as costs, investment selection and investor research and tools. The passive option: opening a robo-advisor account A robo-advisor offers the benefits of stock investing, but doesn't require its owner to do the legwork required to pick individual investments. Robo-advisor services provide complete investment management: These companies will ask you about your investing goals during the onboarding process and then build you a portfolio designed to achieve those aims. This may sound expensive, but the management fees here are generally a fraction of the cost of what a human investment manager would charge: Most robo-advisors charge about 0.25% of your account balance. And yes — you can also get an IRA at a robo-advisor if you wish. If you choose to open an account at a robo-advisor, you probably don't need to read further in this article — the rest is just for those DIY types. 3. Learn the difference between investing in stocks and funds Going the DIY route? Don't worry. Stock investing doesn't have to be complicated. For most people, stock market investing means choosing among these two investment types: Stock mutual funds or exchange-traded funds. Mutual funds let you purchase small pieces of many different stocks in a single transaction. Index funds and ETFs are a kind of mutual fund that track an index; for example, a S&P 500 fund replicates that index by buying the stock of the companies in it. When you invest in a fund, you also own small pieces of each of those companies. You can put several funds together to build a diversified portfolio. Note that stock mutual funds are also sometimes called equity mutual funds. Individual stocks. If you’re after a specific company, you can buy a single share or a few shares as a way to dip your toe into the stock-trading waters. Building a diversified portfolio out of many individual stocks is possible, but it takes a significant investment and research. If you go this route, remember that individual stocks will have ups and downs. If you research a company and choose to invest in it, think about why you picked that company in the first place if jitters start to set in on a down day. » Learn how to research stocks The upside of stock mutual funds is that they are inherently diversified, which reduces your risk. For the vast majority of investors — particularly those who are investing their retirement savings — a portfolio made up of mostly mutual funds is the clear choice. But mutual funds are unlikely to rise in meteoric fashion as some individual stocks might. The upside of individual stocks is that a wise pick can pay off handsomely, but the odds that any individual stock will make you rich are exceedingly slim. » Interested in funds? See our list of the best brokers for ETF investing 4. Set a budget for your stock market investment New investors often have two questions in this step of the process: How much money do I need to start investing in stocks? The amount of money you need to buy an individual stock depends on how expensive the shares are. (Share prices can range from just a few dollars to a few thousand dollars.) Some brokerages allow you to invest with fractional shares. Simply put, you can choose a dollar amount and invest that despite the fact that the share price might be greater than what you have (which means you can owe a fraction of a stock). If you want mutual funds and have a small budget, an exchange-traded fund (ETF) may be your best bet. Mutual funds often have minimums of $1,000 or more, but ETFs trade like a stock, which means you purchase them for a share price — in some cases, less than $100). How much money should I invest in stocks? If you’re investing through funds — have we mentioned this is the preference of most financial advisors? — you can allocate a fairly large portion of your portfolio toward stock funds, especially if you have a long time horizon. A 30-year-old investing for retirement might have 80% of their portfolio in stock funds; the rest would be in bond funds. Individual stocks are another story. A general rule of thumb is to keep these to a small portion of your investment portfolio. » Got a small amount of cash to put to work? Here’s how to invest $500 5. Focus on investing for the long-term Stock market investments have proven to be one of the best ways to grow long-term wealth. Over several decades, the average stock market return is about 10% per year. However, remember that’s just an average across the entire market — some years will be up, some down and individual stocks will vary in their returns. For long-term investors, the stock market is a good investment no matter what’s happening day-to-day or year-to-year; it’s that long-term average they’re looking for. The best thing to do after you start investing in stocks or mutual funds may be the hardest: Don’t look at them. Unless you’re trying to beat the odds and succeed at day trading, it’s good to avoid the habit of compulsively checking how your stocks are doing several times a day, every day. Markets, demystified Register with NerdWallet or sign in to read our monthly stock market outlook, and keep up with the terminology, news and events investors should know about. READ IT HERE 6. Manage your stock portfolio While fretting over daily fluctuations won’t do much for your portfolio’s health — or your own — there will of course be times when you’ll need to check in on your stocks or other investments. If you follow the steps above to buy mutual funds and individual stocks over time, you’ll want to revisit your portfolio a few times a year to make sure it’s still in line with your investment goals. A few things to consider: If you’re approaching retirement, you may want to move some of your stock investments over to more conservative fixed-income investments. If your portfolio is too heavily weighted in one sector or industry, consider buying stocks or funds in a different sector to build more diversification. Finally, pay attention to geographic diversification, too. Vanguard recommends international stocks make up as much as 40% of the stocks