Filings for AY 2023-24 have been stopped. We will notify you once ITR filings for AY 2024-25 are enabled. Products Resources Company Login/Signup Missed filing your ITR? You can still file it on Cleartax in just minutes File Now BROWSE BY TOPICS Income Tax e-Filing Last Date To File ITR For 2022-23 Income Tax Slabs FY 2023-24 Which Is Better: Old vs New Tax Regime For Salaried Employees? House Property Business, Professional &amp; Freelance Which ITR Should I File? Income Tax Refunds Paying Tax Due Salary Income Capital Gains Income Other income sources Advance Tax NRI HUF Income Tax Notices POPULAR ARTICLES 46th GST Council Meeting: Latest News, Highlights and Updates Budget 2023 Highlights: PDF Download, Key Takeaways, Important Points Budget 2022 Highlights: PDF Download, Key Takeaways, Important Points Which ITR Should I File? Types of ITR Forms for FY 2021-22, AY 2022-23 – All ITR Forms HOME ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT WHAT ARE ASSETS AND LIABILITIES? What are Assets and Liabilities? Updated on: Feb 15th, 2024 | 5 min read In simple terms, assets are what a company owns, and liabilities are what a company owes to other parties. Assets put money into a company, whereas liabilities take money from the company. Assets increase the value of a company’s equity while liabilities decrease it. If the number of assets owned by a company is much greater than the liabilities, the business’s financial health is strong. If vice-versa is true, the company could be on the verge of bankruptcy! Assets Assets of a company/business help decrease its costs and increase revenue. A rise in assets spikes profits and generates a cash flow. The economic value of assets owned by a company/business means they can be exchanged or sold in the market. By definition, the assets of an organization are calculated using the following formula: Total assets = Liabilities (accounts payable) + Owner’s equity Types of assets Assets are broadly classified into three different categories. They are: Convertibility: Convertible assets are further divided into Fixed assets and Current assets. Fixed assets: These resources are difficult to convert into cash. Fixed assets include land, machinery, building, equipment, etc. Current assets: These resources can easily be converted into cash. Examples of current assets include cash equivalents, stocks, securities, etc. Physical existence: Assets can be further divided into Tangible and Intangible Assets. Tangible assets: Assets with a physical existence are classified as tangible assets. Examples of this asset class include buildings, equipment, machinery, etc. Intangible assets: Assets without a physical existence are classed as intangible assets. Examples of this class of assets include copyrights, permits, trade secrets, etc. Purpose of use: Assets can further be classified by the purpose of their use into Operating and Non-operating assets. Operating assets: These assets generate revenue and keep daily operations running. Operating assets include cash, building, machinery, equipment, etc. Non-operating assets: Although non-operating assets are not used for day-to-day operations, they generate substantial revenue. Examples of non-operating assets include short-term investments, vacant land, etc. Examples of assets owned by a company/business Cash Inventory Investments Machinery Office equipment Real estate Company-owned vehicles Liabilities A company’s liability is constituted by all its payables to different accounts/parties. The lesser the liabilities, the better it is for the company/business. Liabilities play a crucial role in a company’s financial expansion and smooth operation of everyday commercial processes. By definition, the liabilities of an organization are calculated using the following formula: Total liabilities = Assets (account receivable) – Owner’s equity Types of liabilities Liabilities are divided into two different categories. They are: Internal liability: Examples of internal liabilities include capital, profits, salaries, etc. External liability: Examples of external liabilities include taxes, overdrafts, borrowings, etc. Liabilities can further be classified into three different types: Current liabilities: The accounts under this category are usually short-term, payable within a year. Examples of current liabilities include bills, trade creditors, bank overdrafts, etc. Non-current liabilities: The accounts under this category are long-term, payable over a significant period. Companies typically take upon these to aid expansion or buy fixed assets. Examples of non-current liabilities include debentures, long-term loans, payable bonds, etc. Contingent liabilities: These liabilities may or may not occur depending upon the commercial entity involved in the process. Examples of contingent liabilities include claims against product warranty, lawsuits, etc. Bank debt Mortgage debt Money owed to suppliers Wages owed Taxes owed The importance of a healthy relationship between Assets and Liabilities A good ratio between the assets and liabilities of a company results in a healthy profit. Additionally, the ratio of assets and liabilities dictates the liquidity ratio of a company. The liquidity ratio increases a company’s ability to convert assets into cash equivalent. By definition, the liquidity ratio depends on the following formula: Current ratio = Current Assets / Current Liabilities A higher ratio means the business or the company is thriving and its capability to pay off debt is good. Similarly, a company’s capability to pay off short-term liabilities is decided by the Acid-test ratio. By definition, the Acid-test ratio has the following formula: Acid-test ratio = Current assets – inventories / Current liabilities The cash ratio determines the ability of a company to pay off short-term liabilities with the help of cash flow. By definition, the Cash ratio has the following formula: Cash ratio = Cash and Cash equivalent / Current liabilities Knowing one’s assets and liabilities also helps a company realize its debt ratio, an indicator of the current outstanding debt. Debt ratio = Total Liabilities / Total Assets Assets and liabilities also help a company calculate the value of the existing capital or owner’s equity. It is calculated using the following formula: Owner’s equity = Total assets – Total liabilities Conclusion A company’s assets and liabilities are of utmost importance when measuring its liquidity, debt repayment capability, and profitability. Hence, before investing in a company, it is essential that investors thoroughly study the assets and liabilities of the company. CONTENTS Assets Types of assets Liabilities Types of liabilities The importance of a healthy relationship between Assets and Liabilities Conclusion Follow us on Have a query? Support COMPANY About us Contact us Careers Media & Press User reviews Engineering blog Clear Library FinTech glossary ClearTax Chronicles GST Product Guides Trust & Safety Cleartax(Saudi Arabia) PRODUCTS Individuals Income Tax e Filing Tax Planning ClearInvestment ClearServices Mutual Funds & ITR e-filing App Mutual funds Income Tax Filing Income Tax App android Income Tax Secion 80 Deductions Income tax for NRI ClearGST GST GST Login GST software New GST returns e-invoicing Input tax credit Enterprises ClearGST ClearE-Waybill e-Invoicing Software ClearTDS eWay Bill Registration CAs CA partner program ClearGST ClearTDS ClearTaxCloud ClearPro App SMEs ClearGST ClearOne Billing Software Invoicing Software Services for businesses ClearOne App ClearServices Tax filing for professionals Tax filing for traders Clear Launchpad Trademark Registration Company Registration TDS returns MSME Registration HSN Lookup HSN Code Finder Cement HSN Code Transport HSN Code Plastic HSN Code Cloth GST Rate Books GST Rate RESOURCES & GUIDES GST Resources GST Registration GST Returns GST Procedure GST News & Announcement GSTR 9 Annual Returns GST Payments & Refunds Invoicing Under GST GSTR-2B GSTR-3B ITR Resources Income Tax Slab Form 26AS What is Form 16 Salary Income How to File TDS Returns New Income Tax Portal Incometax.gov.in Income from Selling Shares Income Tax Due Dates Mutual Fund Resources How to Invest in Mutual Funds Mutual fund Types ELSS SIP Mutual Funds Hedge Funds Debt Funds NFO What is AMFI What is NAV Business Resources Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) Mudra Yojana Inflation & Deflation Loan Agreement Succession Certificate Solvency Certificate Debt Settlement Agreement Rental Agreement Letters Of Credit TOOLS Income tax calculator EMI Calculator Mutual fund calculator HSN Code Finder SIP calculator GST calculator PPF Calculator GST number search IFSC Code Search Generate rent receipts Home Loan EMI Calculator NPS Calculator HRA calculator RD Calculator FD Calculator Gold Rates Today Currency Converter Compound Interest Calculator Find HSN code Tax Saving Calculator Get IT refund status Salary Calculator EPF Calculator GST Number Search by Name TRENDING MUTUAL FUNDS ICICI Prudential Technology Fund Direct Plan Growth Tata Digital India Fund Direct Growth Axis Bluechip Fund Growth ICICI Prudential Technology Fund Growth Aditya Birla Sun Life Tax Relief 96 Growth Aditya Birla Sun Life Digital India Fund Direct Plan Growth Quant Tax Plan Growth Option Direct Plan SBI Technology Opportunities Fund Direct Growth Axis Long Term Equity Fund Growth TOP AMCS SBI Mutual Fund Nippon India mutual fund HDFC Mutual Fund UTI mutual fund Kotak Mahindra Mutual Fund ICICI Prudential Mutual Fund Aditya Birla Mutual Fund Axis mutual fund STOCK MARKETS Stock Market Live Yes Bank Share Price SBI Share Price IRCTC Share Price ITC Share Price TCS Share Price Tata Motors Share Price Infosys Share Price Idea Share Price HDFC Bank Share Price BEST FUNDS Best Mutual Funds Best Tax Savings Mutual Funds Best Index Funds Best Equity Mutual Funds Clear offers taxation & financial solutions to individuals, businesses, organizations & chartered accountants in India. Clear serves 1.5+ Million happy customers, 20000+ CAs & tax experts & 10000+ businesses across India. Efiling Income Tax Returns(ITR) is made easy with Clear platform. Just upload your form 16, claim your deductions and get your acknowledgment number online. You can efile income tax return on your income from salary, house property, capital gains, business & profession and income from other sources. Further you can also file TDS returns, generate Form-16, use our Tax Calculator software, claim HRA, check refund status and generate rent receipts for Income Tax Filing. CAs, experts and businesses can get GST ready with Clear GST software & certification course. Our GST Software helps CAs, tax experts & business to manage returns & invoices in an easy manner. Our Goods & Services Tax course includes tutorial videos, guides and expert assistance to help you in mastering Goods and Services Tax. Clear can also help you in getting your business registered for Goods & Services Tax Law. Save taxes with Clear by investing in tax saving mutual funds (ELSS) online. Our experts suggest the best funds and you can get high returns by investing directly or through SIP. Download Black by ClearTax App to file returns from your mobile phone. CLEARTAX IS A PRODUCT BY DEFMACRO SOFTWARE PVT. LTD. Company Policy Terms of use ISO 27001 Data Center SSL Certified Site 128-bit encryption May we use cookies to track your activities? We take your privacy very seriously. Please see our privacy policy for details and any questions.Yes No