Corporate Finance Institute Explore CFI For Teams Pricing Resources Log In Start Free Home › Resources › Commercial Lending › Amortization Schedule Table of contents What is an Amortization Schedule? Understanding Loan Amortization Components of a Loan Payment Equal Payment vs. Equal Amortizing Related Resources Amortization Schedule A table that provides details of the periodic payments for a reducing loan Over 1.8 million professionals use CFI to learn accounting, financial analysis, modeling and more. Start with a free account to explore 20+ always-free courses and hundreds of finance templates and cheat sheets. Start Free Written by Kyle Peterdy What is an Amortization Schedule? An amortization schedule is a table that provides both loan and payment details for a reducing term loan. Details typically include the original loan amount, the loan balance at each payment, the interest rate, the amortization period, the total payment amount, and the proportion of each payment that is made up of interest vs. principal. Amortization schedules can be easily generated using several basic Microsoft Excel functions. In general, amortization schedules are provided to borrowers by banks or other financial institutions when credit is extended so that borrowers understand the repayment structure. Key Highlights An amortization schedule is presented as a table that outlines key loan characteristics like payment amount, interest vs. principal, and the current balance. An “amortizing loan” is another way of saying a “reducing loan” (for which the balance outstanding reduces at each payment). A non-amortizing loan where the full balance outstanding is due at the end of the loan term is often called a “bullet repayment.” Reducing term loans are usually structured as either equal payment (blended) or as equal amortizing (principal + interest). Understanding Loan Amortization A good deal of both consumer credit (like car loans and home mortgages) and business credit (like CAPEX loans for PP&E and commercial mortgages) is repaid by periodic payments, sometimes called installments. These are often monthly, but not always. When a loan is repaid in installments, it’s typically referred to as an amortizing loan (or a reducing loan). Below is an example of a $100,000 loan on a 12-month (1-year) amortization. The point of a reducing loan is that the outstanding balance is paid down to zero at the end of the amortization period: Components of a Loan Payment Every loan payment has two components, interest and principal. With a reducing loan, some portion of the original loan amount is repaid at each installment. Only this principal portion of the loan payment reduces the total loan amount outstanding; the interest portion does not. The proportion of interest vs. principal depends largely on the interest rate and on whether the loan is structured as an equal amortizing loan or as an equal payment loan (often called blended payments). Equal Payment vs. Equal Amortizing Amortization schedules should clearly show if a loan is equal payment or equal amortizing. Equal Payment Loans This is often referred to as a blended payment structure. The borrower knows exactly how much their loan payment is, and the payment amount will be equal each period. A common example is a residential mortgage, which is often structured this way. Here’s an easy way to visualize loan payments on a 2-year (24-month) amortization schedule: Since interest is calculated on the principal amount outstanding at the end of the previous period, the proportion of interest embedded in the loan payment (orange) is higher earlier on, then lower later. The secondary vertical axis shows the total loan balance, represented graphically by the gray line. You’ll notice that the outstanding loan balance decreases with each installment of principal (blue bars). Equal Amortizing Loans This is often referred to as a P&I structure (principal + interest). In an equal amortizing structure, the loan amount is divided by the total number of payments; this becomes the principal payment amount each period, with interest being charged over and above the principal amount. Here is the same loan as before ($100,000 over 24 months) but using an equal amortizing structure instead of an equal payment structure: Here the blue “principal” bar remains the same over the loan amortization period, with the orange interest being added incrementally. Related Resources CFI offers the Commercial Banking & Credit Analyst (CBCA)™ certification program for those looking to take their careers in banking to the next level. To keep learning and advancing your career, the following resources will be helpful: What is Credit Amortized Bond Credit Analysis Mortgage See all commercial lending resources Fundamentals of Credit Learn what credit is, compare important loan characteristics, and cover the qualitative and quantitative techniques used in the analysis and underwriting process. Get Started Share this article Get Certified for Commercial Banking (CBCA®) Stand out and gain a competitive edge as a commercial banker, loan officer or credit analyst with advanced knowledge, real-world analysis skills, and career confidence. Learn More Company About CFI Meet Our Team Careers at CFI Editorial Standards CPE Credits Learner Reviews Partnerships Affiliates Higher Education Certifications FMVA® CBCA® CMSA® BIDA® FPWM™ ESG Leadership Excel CFI For Teams Financial Services Corporate Finance Professional Services Support Help | FAQ Financial Aid Legal Community Member Community What’s New NetLearnings Resources Logo Trustpilot Logo © 2015 to 2024 CFI Education Inc. Follow us on LinkedIn Follow us on Instagram Follow us on Facebook Follow us on YouTube Privacy Policy Terms of Use Terms of Service Legal