S&P 500 +154% Stock Advisor +672% JOIN THE MOTLEY FOOL ACCESSIBILITY LOG IN HELP Our Services Investing Basics Stock Market Retirement The Ascent About Us 67% Off* April Fools’ Sale! Celebrate With Us! Sign up to get YOUR Financial Freedom Score! — The Motley Fool Foundation Times Terms > I > Internal Rate Of Return What Is Internal Rate of Return (IRR)? By Mike Price – Updated Dec 4, 2023 at 10:18AM Internal rate of return (IRR) is the expected average return of an investment. IRR is commonly used in corporate finance and is similar to the compound annual growth rate (CAGR), which is more commonly used by stock investors. IRR is a part of the net present value (NPV) equation. A project's IRR is the return rate that makes the net present value of the project equal $0. Image source: Getty Images. How to calculate IRR Using a program like Microsoft (MSFT 0.78%) Excel is the most efficient way to calculate IRR. Perhaps counterintuitively, to compute an IRR, first we need the formula for NPV: NPV formula Setting NPV to zero and solving for "r" -- the discount rate in this equation -- produces a value that represents a project's IRR. If a company's management has a choice to pursue one of two projects, then they can compute the IRR for each project and pursue the project that is the most profitable. Using a fictional example, imagine that FoolCo is considering either embarking on an expansion project or purchasing a new machine. Both projects would be initially costly but would later boost the company's profits. The projected cash inflows and outflows for each proposed project are as follows: Image source: The Motley Fool In Excel, you can use the program's XIRR function to solve for "r" -- the IRR -- for each project. The XIRR function first asks for the dates, followed by the cash flows, and then a guess at the IRR of 20%. The guess is not required, and Excel defaults to a guess of 10% if none is entered. Pressing enter causes the function to iterate to instantly produced the correct "r" value that results in the NPV equaling zero. Using the XIRR function to compute the IRR for both projects demonstrates that the expansion project would produce an internal rate of return of 14.5%, while the new machine purchase would generate an IRR of 26.5%. From a purely financial standpoint, FoolCo should choose to buy the new machine. New to investing and not sure where to start? Sign up and view our beginner investing guide. This video will help you get started and give you the confidence to make your first investment. The Motley Fool has helped millions of people in the pursuit of financial freedom — helping the world become smarter, happier, and richer. Enter Email Address: By submitting your email address, you consent to us keeping you informed about updates to our website and about other products and services that we think might interest you. You can unsubscribe at any time. The Motley Fool respects your privacy and strive to be transparent about our data collection practices. Please read our Privacy Policy and Terms of Use. Limitations of IRR While IRR is useful for financial professionals, it only considers cash flows. IRR calculations don't take into consideration the accuracy of the cash flow projections or other risks related to the proposed project. A famous investor once said that a project's NPV is like the Hubble Telescope -- adjusting your position by an inch can land you in a totally different universe. IRR has essentially the same limitations. IRR vs. return on investment (ROI) While IRR is used primarily by companies to make business decisions, return on investment (ROI) is used by stock investors to determine investment gains on a percentage basis. If you buy a stock for $50 and later sell it for $75, your ROI for that investment is the amount of the stock price increase divided by the amount that you paid for the stock and multiplied by 100 to express the return as a percent. The stock price increase of $25 in this example would represent an ROI of 50%. While IRR takes into account the passage of time, ROI does not. A stock's ROI can remain the same regardless of how much time passes between purchase and sale. Related investing topics How to Invest in Stocks Are you ready to jump into the stock market? We've got you. How to Invest $100 You can start your investment journey with a small sum of money. Here's what to do with it. What Is Real Estate Management? Balancing time and cash flow can get tricky as an investor. Enter the real estate manager. How to Make Money in Real Estate With multiple avenues to making money in real estate investing, which is right for you? Is IRR important for investors? IRR is generally not very useful for investors. While knowing whether a company is consistently choosing projects with the highest IRRs would be relevant information, management teams typically do not share projected cash outflows and inflows for proposed projects. Not having this information makes it generally impossible for investors to use IRR to make stock purchase decisions. Where to invest $1,000 right now When our analyst team has a stock tip, it can pay to listen. After all, the newsletter they have run for over a decade, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has nearly tripled the market.* They just revealed what they believe are the ten best stocks for investors to buy right now… See the 10 stocks *Stock Advisor returns as of April 1, 2024 Mike Price has no position in any of the stocks mentioned. The Motley Fool has positions in and recommends Microsoft. The Motley Fool has a disclosure policy. INVEST SMARTER WITH THE MOTLEY FOOL Join Over Half a Million Premium Members Receiving… New Stock Picks Each Month Detailed Analysis of Companies Model Portfolios Live Streaming During Market Hours And Much More Get Started Now HOW THE MOTLEY FOOL CAN HELP YOU Premium Investing Guidance Market beating stocks from our award-winning service The Daily Upside Newsletter Investment news and high-quality insights delivered straight to your inbox Get Started Investing You can do it. Successful investing in just a few steps Win at Retirement Secrets and strategies for the post-work life you want. Find a Broker Find the right brokerage account for you. Listen to our Podcasts Hear our experts take on stocks, the market, and how to invest. Our Guides What Is an Internet Service Provider (ISP)? What Is Implied Volatility (IV)? What Is an International Bank Account Number (IBAN)? What Is an Interest Rate? Premium Investing Services Invest better with The Motley Fool. Get stock recommendations, portfolio guidance, and more from The Motley Fool's premium services. View Premium Services Making the world smarter, happier, and richer. Facebook Facebook Twitter Twitter Linked In LinkedIn Pinterest Pinterest YouTube YouTube Instagram Instagram Tiktok TikTok © 1995 - 2024 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. Market data powered by Xignite and Polygon.io. ABOUT THE MOTLEY FOOL About Us Careers Research Newsroom Contact Advertise OUR SERVICES Stock Advisor Rule Breakers Rule Your Retirement The Ascent All Services AROUND THE GLOBE Fool UK Fool Australia Fool Canada FREE TOOLS CAPS Stock Ratings Discussion Boards Calculators Financial Dictionary AFFILIATES & FRIENDS Motley Fool Asset Management Motley Fool Wealth Management Motley Fool Ventures 1623 Capital Motley Fool Foundation Terms of Use Privacy Policy Disclosure Policy Accessibility Policy Copyright, Trademark and Patent Information Terms and Conditions Do Not Sell My Personal Information × APRIL 1ST APRIL FOOLS' DAY SALE (SERIOUSLY!) Motley Fool Stock Advisor for only $199 $65*! (save $134) + Special Bonus Dividend Report Expires in… Take advantage of our April Fools' new member offer now! Continue › *$65/year is a promotional price for new members only. 67% discount based on current list price of Stock Advisor of $199/year. Membership will renew annually at the then current list price. Offer expires on April 1, 2024 at 11:59 pm PST.