Payments Login Apply Jobs Call Us Today! +44 (0)1865 515255 Courses Apprenticeships Study Options About Venues Contact What is a PESTEL analysis? A PESTEL analysis is an acronym for a tool used to identify the macro (external) forces facing an organisation. The letters stand for Political, Economic, Social, Technological, Environmental and Legal. In this blog, we will look at what a PESTEL analysis is used for as well as the advantages and disadvantages of using it in a business setting. In marketing, before any kind of strategy or tactical plan can be implemented, it is fundamental to conduct a full situational analysis. This analysis should be repeated every six months to identify any changes in the macro-environment. Organisations that successfully monitor and respond to changes in the macro-environment can differentiate from the competition and thus have a competitive advantage over others. The framework is also used to identify potential threats and weaknesses which are used in a SWOT Analysis when identifying any strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats to a business. Let’s look at each element of a PESTEL analysis. Political Factors These determine the extent to which government and government policy may impact on an organisation or a specific industry. This would include political policy and stability as well as trade, fiscal and taxation policies too. Economic Factors An economic factor has a direct impact on the economy and its performance, which in turn directly impacts on the organisation and its profitability. Factors include interest rates, employment or unemployment rates, raw material costs and foreign exchange rates. Social Factors The focus here is on the social environment and identifying emerging trends. This helps a marketer to further understand consumer needs and wants in a social setting. Factors include changing family demographics, education levels, cultural trends, attitude changes and changes in lifestyles. Technological Factors Technological factors consider the rate of technological innovation and development that could affect a market or industry. Factors could include advances in technology, developments in AI, automation, research and development. There is often a tendency to focus on developments only in digital technology, but consideration must also be given to new methods of distribution, manufacturing and logistics. Environmental Factors Environmental factors are those that are influenced by the surrounding environment and the impact of ecological aspects. With the rise in importance of CSR (Corporate Social Responsibility) and sustainability, this element is becoming more central to how organisations need to conduct their business. Factors include climate change, government environmental policies and initiatives, carbon footprint, waste disposal and sustainability practices. Legal Factors An organisation must understand what is legal and allowed within the territories they operate in. They also must be aware of any change in legislation and the impact this may have on business operations. Factors include employment legislation, consumer law, healthy and safety, international as well as trade regulation and restrictions. Political factors do cross over with legal factors; however, the key difference is that political factors are led by government policy, whereas legal factors must be complied with. How to do a PESTEL Analysis? There are several steps involved when undertaking a PESTEL analysis. At first, it is important to get a group of people together from different areas of the business and brainstorm ideas. Next, you will want to consult and seek the opinions of experts from outside your business. These could be your customers, distributors, suppliers or consultants who know your business well. The third stage will involve you researching and gathering evidence for each insight in your Analysis. Then you will want to evaluate and score each of the items for ‘likelihood’; how likely it is to happen and ‘impact’; how big an impact it could have on your business. The final stage involves refining your ideas and repeating the proves until you have a manageable number of points in each of the six categories. Advantages and Disadvantages of a PESTEL Analysis It is an essential analysis tool for any strategist’s toolkit but there are some benefits and challenges associated with it. Advantages of a PESTEL Analysis: It can provide an advance warning of potential threats and opportunities It encourages businesses to consider the external environment in which they operate The analysis can help organisations understand external trends Disadvantages of a PESTEL Analysis: Many researchers argued that simplicity of the model that it is a simple list which is not sufficient and comprehensive The most significant disadvantage of the model is it is only based on an assessment of the external environment Keeping your PESTEL Analysis updated Keeping this analysis updated is crucial because the environment organisations operate in is dynamic and constantly changing external factors can change rapidly and can impact your analysis and therefore, the outcome you expect. You can keep your PESTEL analysis updated by: 1. Set up Alerts and Monitoring Systems Subscribe to news alerts, industry reports, and government publications relevant to your industry and market. 2. Regularly Review and Revise Schedule periodic PESTEL analysis reviews, such as quarterly or semi-annually, to assess changes in the external environment. 3. Engage with Industry Networks and Experts Attend industry conferences, seminars, and webinars to stay informed about the latest trends and developments. Final Thoughts A PESTEL analysis helps an organisation identify the external forces that could impact their market and analyse how they could directly impact their business. It’s important when undertaking such an analysis that the factors affecting the organisation are not just identified but are also assessed – for example, what impact might they have on the organisation? The outcomes can then be used to populate the opportunities and threats in a SWOT analysis. If you are interested in how to successfully undertake a PESTEL analysis and how it can be used to undertake a strategic marketing audit, why not develop your marketing knowledge and skills further with the CIM Diploma in Professional Marketing. For more information about this qualification or our range of marketing courses, get in touch with our team. Updated October 2023. Original Referenced Source: Aguilar, F. J. (1967) Scanning the Business Environment, New York:Macmillan Company, 1967. June 30th, 2016 Share This Story, Choose Your Platform! Recent The Secrets to TikTok Success: Webinar March 18th, 2024 LinkedIn Ads Key Trends For 2024 March 13th, 2024 Top 5 AI Marketing Trends to Watch in 2024 Webinar February 19th, 2024 Crisis Management: A Survival Guide to Handle Tough Events: Webinar February 5th, 2024 The Future of TV Advertising January 31st, 2024 Categories CIM Exam Revision CIPR Marketing and Digital Marketing OXCOM News Professional Development and Careers Advice Public Relations Sales and Marketing Management Articles Student and Graduate Stories Student Resources Webinars Oxford College of Marketing, Summertown Pavilion, Middleway, Oxford OX2 7LG +44 (0)1865 515255 enquiries@oxfordpeg.com Oxford College of Marketing is part of Oxford Professional Education.