Products Solutions Accountants Partners Blog Support Login Advice Cash Flow HR & Payroll Free Guides & Templates Financial management Member Masterclass Grow Your Firm Subscribe to Sage Advice View our full Glossary of accounting & payroll terms GLOSSARY DEFINITION What is net profit? What is net profit? Synonymous with net income, net profit is a company’s total earnings after subtracting all expenses. Expenses subtracted include the costs of normal business operation as well as depreciation and taxes. Net profit is commonly referred to as a company’s “bottom line” and is a true indicator of a company’s profitability. While the basic net profit definition does not vary in content from that of net income, there is some variance in usage between organizations. Since the general term “profit” is calculated at different stages in a company’s financial reporting with varying qualifiers, “net profit” may appear on a financial statement in the context of “net profit after taxes” to differentiate between items accounting for and excluding taxes while keeping terms consistent. To determine, follow this net profit calculation: Net Profit = Total Revenue – (Total Expenses + Taxes + Depreciation) From cash flow challenge to smart money management 90% of business failures are caused by cash flow problems. Discover how to go from having a cash flow challenge to smart money management. Download Guide Subscribe to our Sage Advice Newsletter Get our latest business advice delivered directly to your inbox. Subscribe Related topics Accounting 101 CFO 3.0 Search See this term in action MARCH 28, 2024 6 MIN READ Top qualities to look for in your SaaS startup’s first CFO MARCH 25, 2024 9 MIN READ 15 SaaS financial metrics you need to track MARCH 22, 2024 9 MIN READ What is liquidity and how to measure It? Learn more about this definition and others Featured reading AUGUST 29, 2023 6 MIN READ 6 powerful lessons from baseball for business: Cal Ripken's secret advice for successful business leaders FEBRUARY 12, 2024 10 MIN READ How to recommend software to accounting clients SEPTEMBER 18, 2023 5 MIN READ How SVB amplified the risk of invoice fraud — and what you should do about it Popular terms What is an accounting ledger? What is Recruitment? What is compensation? What is annual contract value (ACV), and how to calculate it? Subscribe Subscribe to the Sage Advice newsletter, and receive our latest advice direct to your inbox. Subscribe to Sage Advice Join Sage Join our Sage Community Hub to speak with business people like you. It's the place to ask questions and share experiences. Join now Small businesses Medium businesses Accountants & bookkeepers Become a Partner Developer documentation Educators Sage Marketplace COMPANY Overview Sage events About Sage Sage Foundation Investors News Careers Trust and Security Sustainability & Society Sage Champions PRODUCTS Sage Intacct Sage 50 Accounting Sage X3 Sage People Sage Ai Sage 300 Construction and Real Estate Sage HR Payments and Banking See all products SUPPORT & TRAINING Support Contact us Blog Training Community Sage Affiliate Program Support Member benefits United States | English SOLUTIONS – BY BUSINESS NEED Accounting app Startup Cloud accounting software Payments Business management © Sage Group plc 2024 Accessibility Legal Privacy notice and cookies General data protection regulation Sitemap These articles and related content is the property of The Sage Group plc or its contractors or its licensors (“Sage”). Please do not copy, reproduce, modify, distribute or disburse without express consent from Sage. These articles and related content is provided as a general guidance for informational purposes only. Accordingly, Sage does not provide advice per the information included. These articles and related content is not a substitute for the guidance of a lawyer (and especially for questions related to GDPR), tax, or compliance professional. When in doubt, please consult your lawyer tax, or compliance professional for counsel. This article and related content is provided on an” as is” basis. Sage makes no representations or warranties of any kind, express or implied, about the completeness or accuracy of this article and related content. Sage Advice WISDOM FOR SMARTER BUSINESSES Subscribe to Sage Advice