INVESTING SIMULATOR BANKING PERSONAL FINANCE NEWS REVIEWS ACADEMY LIVE Table of Contents What Is Opportunity Cost? Formula and Calculation Opportunity Cost and Capital Structure Example of an Opportunity Cost Analysis Opportunity Cost vs. Sunk Cost Opportunity Cost vs. Risk Accounting Profit vs. Economic Profit FAQs The Bottom Line BUSINESS BUSINESS ESSENTIALS Opportunity Cost: Definition, Calculation Formula, and Examples By JASON FERNANDO Updated October 31, 2023 Reviewed by AMY DRURY Fact checked by PETE RATHBURN What Is Opportunity Cost? Opportunity cost represents the potential benefits that a business, an investor, or an individual consumer misses out on when choosing one alternative over another. While opportunity costs can't be predicted with total certainty, taking them into consideration can lead to better decision making. KEY TAKEAWAYS Opportunity cost is the forgone benefit that would have been derived from an option other than the one that was chosen. To properly evaluate opportunity costs, the costs and benefits of every option available must be considered and weighed against the others. Considering potential opportunity costs can guide individuals and organizations to more profitable decision making. Opportunity cost is a strictly internal measure used for strategic planning; it is not included in accounting profit or reflected in external financial reporting. Examples of opportunity cost considerations include investing in a new manufacturing plant in Los Angeles as opposed to Mexico City, deciding to upgrade company equipment or hire additional workers, or buying stock A vs. stock B. Investopedia / Mira Norian Formula for Calculating Opportunity Cost Opportunity Cost=FO−CO where: FO=Return on best forgone option CO=Return on chosen option The formula for calculating an opportunity cost is simply the difference between the expected returns of each option. Consider a company that is faced with the following two mutually exclusive options: Option A: Invest excess capital in the stock market Option B: Invest excess capital back into the business for new equipment to increase production Assume the expected return on investment (ROI) in the stock market is 10% over the next year, while the company estimates that the equipment update would generate an 8% return over the same period. The opportunity cost of choosing the equipment over the stock market is 2% (10% - 8%). In other words, by investing in the business, the company would forgo the opportunity to earn a higher return—at least for that first year. When considering two different securities, it is also important to take risk into account. For example, comparing a Treasury bill to a highly volatile stock can be misleading, even if both have the same expected return so that the opportunity cost of either option is 0%. That's because the U.S. government backs the return on the T-bill, making it virtually risk-free, and there is no such guarantee in the stock market. Opportunity Cost and Capital Structure Opportunity cost analysis can play a crucial role in determining a company's capital structure. A business incurs an explicit cost in taking on debt or issuing equity because it must compensate its lenders or shareholders. And each option also carries an opportunity cost. Money that a company uses to make payments on its bonds or other debt, for example, cannot be invested for other purposes. So the company must decide if an expansion or other growth opportunity made possible by borrowing would generate greater profits than it could make through outside investments. Companies try to weigh the costs and benefits of borrowing money vs. issuing stock, including both monetary and non-monetary considerations, to arrive at an optimal balance that minimizes opportunity costs. Because opportunity cost is a forward-looking consideration, the actual rate of return (RoR) for both options is unknown at that point, making this evaluation tricky in practice. Example of an Opportunity Cost Analysis Assume that a business has $20,000 in available funds and must choose between investing the money in securities, which it expects to return 10% a year, or using it to purchase new machinery. No matter which option the business chooses, the potential profit that it gives up by not investing in the other option is the opportunity cost. If the business goes with the securities option, its investment would theoretically gain $2,000 in the first year, $2,200 in the second, and $2,420 in the third. Alternatively, if the business purchases a new machine, it will be able to increase its production. Knowing that the machine setup and employee training will be intensive, and the new machine will not be up to maximum efficiency for the first couple of years, the company estimates that it would net an additional $500 in profit in the first year, then $2,000 in year two, and $5,000 in all future years. By these calculations, choosing the securities makes sense in the first and second years. However, by the third year, an analysis of the opportunity cost indicates that the new machine is the better option ($500 + $2,000 + $5,000 - $2,000 - $2,200 - $2,420) = $880. The Most Expensive Pizza Ever? One of the most dramatic examples of opportunity cost is a 2010 exchange of 10,000 bitcoins for two large pizzas, which at the time was worth about $41. 1 As of October 2023, those 10,000 bitcoins would be worth about $343 million. 2 Opportunity Cost vs. Sunk Cost A sunk cost is money already spent at some point in the past, while opportunity cost is the potential returns not earned in the future on an investment because the money was invested elsewhere. When considering opportunity cost, any sunk costs previously incurred are typically ignored. 3 Buying 1,000 shares of company A at $10 a share, for instance, represents a sunk cost of $10,000. This is the amount of money paid out to invest, and it can't be recouped without selling the stock (and perhaps not in full even then). From an accounting perspective, a sunk cost also could refer to the initial outlay to purchase an expensive piece of heavy equipment, which might be amortized over time, but which is sunk in the sense that the company won't be getting the money back. Opportunity Cost vs. Risk In economics, risk describes the possibility that an investment's actual and projected returns will be different and that the investor may lose some or all of their capital. Opportunity cost reflects the possibility that the returns of a chosen investment will be lower than the returns of a forgone investment. The key difference is that risk compares the actual performance of an investment against the projected performance of the same investment, while opportunity cost compares the projected performance of an investment against the projected performance of another investment. Accounting Profit vs. Economic Profit Accounting profit is the net income calculation often stipulated by the generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) used by most companies in the U.S. Under those rules, only explicit, real costs are subtracted from total revenue. Economic profit, however, includes opportunity cost as an expense. This theoretical calculation can then be used to compare the actual profit of the company to what its profit might have been had it made different decisions. Economic profit (and any other calculation that considers opportunity cost) is strictly an internal value used for strategic decision making. What Is a Simple Definition of Opportunity Cost? Opportunity cost refers to the hidden cost associated with not taking an alternative course of action. What Is an Example of Opportunity Cost in Investing? Consider a young investor who decides to put $5,000 into bonds each year and dutifully does so for 50 years. Assuming an average annual return of 2.5%, their portfolio at the end of that time would be worth nearly $500,000. Although this result might seem impressive, it is less so when you consider the investor's opportunity cost. If, for example, they had instead invested half of their money in the stock market and received an average blended return of 5% a year, their portfolio would have been worth more than $1 million. Their opportunity cost in this case would be over $500,000. How Do You Predict Opportunity Cost? Any effort to predict opportunity cost must rely heavily on estimates and assumptions. There's no way of knowing exactly how a different course of action will play out financially over time. Investors might use the historic returns on various types of investments in an attempt to forecast their likely returns. However, as the famous disclaimer goes, "Past performance is no guarantee of future results." 4 The Bottom Line While opportunity costs can't be predicted with absolute certainty, they provide a way for companies and individuals to think through their investment options and, ideally, arrive at better decisions. ARTICLE SOURCES Related Terms Incremental Analysis: Definition, Types, Importance, and Example Incremental analysis is a decision-making tool used in business to determine the true cost difference between alternatives and, thus, the most profitable choice. more Sunk Cost Dilemma: What It Means, How It Works, and Example The sunk cost dilemma describes the decision of whether to stick with a project you've invested in that has not yet achieved desired results. more Hurdle Rate: What It Is and How Businesses and Investors Use It A hurdle rate is the minimum rate of return a project or investment must achieve to be approved by an investor or manager. more Internal Rate of Return (IRR): Formula and Examples The internal rate of return (IRR) is a metric used in capital budgeting to estimate the return of potential investments. Here is the formula for calculating it. more Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) Formula and Calculation The compound annual growth rate (CAGR) measures an investment's annual growth rate over a period of time, assuming profits are reinvested at the end of each year. more What Is Present Value in Finance, and How Is It Calculated? Present value means an amount of money today is worth more than that same amount in the future. Unspent money today could lose value by a future date due to inflation. more Related Articles Incremental Analysis: Definition, Types, Importance, and Example Sunk Cost Dilemma: What It Means, How It Works, and Example Hurdle Rate: What It Is and How Businesses and Investors Use It Internal Rate of Return (IRR): Formula and Examples What Are the Types of Costs in Cost Accounting? Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) Formula and Calculation Partner Links About Us Terms of Service Dictionary Editorial Policy Advertise News Privacy Policy Contact Us Careers EU Privacy # A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Investopedia is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family. Please review our updated Terms of Service.