PEOPLE SELF-EMPLOYED PROFESSIONALS AND BUSINESSES Become a customer Access Menu Business Loan The loan that adapts to the size of your projects The loan that offers the flexibility your business needs to finance its investments. For the investments you wish to make at any given time. Fixed or variable interest rate. For self-employed workers, SMEs and companies. Apply Become a customer and get special conditions You will get all the advantages of the Business Loan, along with unique financing conditions. To get them, just sign up for a Bienvenida Account with no fees, online and in just a few minutes. Only for new self-employed customers and companies with a turnover below 5 million euros a year. Become a BBVA customer Everything you need For all your project needs Acquire materials, handle supplier payments, invest in machinery, or digitalize your business with licenses and software. With a team to guide you every step of the way Count on your adviser to resolve any questions that may arise during the process. With flexible conditions You have the flexibility to adjust installment payments to monthly, quarterly, semi-annually, or annually according to your business income's seasonality. For a project idea If you have a project in mind and require some extra support to bring it to life. We are committed to sustainability If you want to make your business more sustainable, and you are thinking about investing in solar panels for your premises or switching your vehicles to electric ones. Apply You can always count on the team of advisers to provide you with guidance Whatever your next step is, we'll be there to take it with you. Contact our team for any inquiries you may have regarding the process, required documentation, or the terms of your Business Loan Some questions that may come up I can repay the loan early? If you decide to repay some or all of your loan before the end of the period specified in the application, you will have to pay an early repayment fee. How much money can I request? Do I need to be a customer to apply? Do I have to justify how I use the loan? Could my loan be denied? What fees does the loan have? Financing BBVA Business Loan More BBVA Agro Hospitality BBVA Spark Entrepreneurship Experts in companies Responsible business Shareholders BBVA Research Jobs at BBVA Network of BBVA agents bbva.com BBVA Pivot Currency exchange Responsible business The latest ICO Ukraine Guarantee Facility BBVA Company aggregator Financial aggregator for self-employed workers BBVA My Business Online Business Loan Negocios Account Online Credit Account Negocios Credit Card Insurance for companies Cybersecurity Sustainability APIs for companies Calculators and simulators Loan Simulator Car loan calculator Mortgage calculator IBAN calculator Salary calculator Gasoline cost calculator BBVA Valora BBVA Invest Environmental impact calculator for companies Utilities Branches and ATMs Online Business Banking Finances at a glance Economic dictionary Apps Legal notice Cookies Personal data Statutory reports Payment services Fees Notice board Customer care service Español Català English Galego Euskara Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria S.A. 2024 Creating Opportunities