An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Español Business Guide Funding Programs Federal Contracting Learning Platform Local Assistance About SBA For Partners Newsroom Contact us Other languages Home Business Guide Plan Your Business Fund Your Business 10 steps to start your business Plan your business Market research and competitive analysis Write your business plan Calculate your startup costs Establish business credit Fund your business Buy an existing business or franchise Launch your business Manage your business Grow your business Fund your business It costs money to start a business. Funding your business is one of the first — and most important — financial choices most business owners make. How you choose to fund your business could affect how you structure and run your business. Content Determine how much funding you'll need Fund your business yourself with self-funding Get venture capital from investors No treasure map necessary Use crowdfunding to fund your business Get a small business loan Use Lender Match to find lenders who offer SBA-guaranteed loans SBA investment programs Determine how much funding you'll need Every business has different needs, and no financial solution is one-size-fits-all. Your personal financial situation and vision for your business will shape the financial future of your business. Once you know how much startup funding you’ll need, it’s time to figure out how you’ll get it. Self-funding Investors Loans Fund your business yourself with self-funding Otherwise known as bootstrapping, self-funding lets you leverage your own financial resources to support your business. Self-funding can come in the form of turning to family and friends for capital, using your savings accounts, or even tapping into your 401(k). With self-funding, you retain complete control over the business, but you also take on all the risk yourself. Be careful not to spend more than you can afford, and be especially careful if you choose to tap into retirement accounts early. You might face expensive fees or penalties, or damage your ability to retire on time — so you should check with your plan’s administrator and a personal financial advisor first. Get venture capital from investors Investors can give you funding to start your business in the form of venture capital investments. Venture capital is normally offered in exchange for an ownership share and active role in the company. Venture capital differs from traditional financing in a number of important ways. Venture capital typically: Focuses high-growth companies Invests capital in return for equity, rather than debt (it’s not a loan) Takes higher risks in exchange for potential higher returns Has a longer investment horizon than traditional financing Almost all venture capitalists will, at a minimum, want a seat on the board of directors. So be prepared to give up some portion of both control and ownership of your company in exchange for funding. How to get venture capital funding There’s no guaranteed way to get venture capital, but the process generally follows a standard order of basic steps. Find an investor Look for individual investors — sometimes called “angel investors” — or venture capital firms. Be sure to do enough background research to know if the investor is reputable and has experience working with startup companies. Share your business plan The investor will review your business plan to make sure it meets their investing criteria. Most investment funds concentrate on an industry, geographic area, or stage of business development. Go through due diligence review The investors will look at your company’s management team, market, products and services, corporate governance documents, and financial statements. Work out the terms If they want to invest, the next step is to agree on a term sheet that describes the terms and conditions for the fund to make an investment. Investment Once you agree on a term sheet, you can get the investment! Once a venture fund has invested, it becomes actively involved in the company. Venture funds normally come in “rounds.” As the company meets milestones, further rounds of financing are made available, with adjustments in price as the company executes its plan. No treasure map necessary When John and Kelly didn’t have enough money to open their auto repair shop, they got an SBA-backed loan to help start their business. Use crowdfunding to fund your business Crowdfunding raises funds for a business from a large number of people, called crowdfunders. Crowdfunders aren’t technically investors, because they don’t receive a share of ownership in the business and don’t expect a financial return on their money. Instead, crowdfunders expect to get a “gift” from your company as thanks for their contribution. Often, that gift is the product you plan to sell or other special perks, like meeting the business owner or getting their name in the credits. This makes crowdfunding a popular option for people who want to produce creative works (like a documentary), or a physical product (like a high-tech cooler). Crowdfunding is also popular because it’s very low risk for business owners. Not only do you get to retain full control of your company, but if your plan fails, you’re typically under no obligation to repay your crowdfunders. Every crowdfunding platform is different, so make sure to read the fine print and understand your full financial and legal obligations. Get a small business loan If you want to retain complete control of your business, but don’t have enough funds to start, consider a small business loan. To increase your chances of securing a loan, you should have a business plan, expense sheet, and financial projections for the next five years. These tools will give you an idea of how much you'll need to ask for, and will help the bank know they’re making a smart choice by giving you a loan. Once you have your materials ready, contact banks and credit unions to request a loan. You’ll want to compare offers to get the best possible terms for your loan. Use Lender Match to find lenders who offer SBA-guaranteed loans If you have trouble getting a traditional business loan, you should look into SBA-guaranteed loans. When a bank thinks your business is too risky to lend money to, the U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA) can agree to guarantee your loan. That way, the bank has less risk and is more willing to give your business a loan. Use Lender Match to find lenders who offer SBA-guaranteed loans. SBA investment programs Small Business Investment Company (SBIC) SBICs are privately owned and managed investment funds licensed and regulated by SBA. They use their own capital, plus funds borrowed with an SBA guarantee, to make equity and debt investments in qualifying small businesses. Learn more about SBICs to see if your business might qualify. Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) program This program encourages small businesses to engage in federal research and development that has the potential for commercialization. Find out if the SBIR’s competitive awards-based program(link is external) makes sense for you. Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) program This program offers funding opportunities in the federal innovation research and development arena. Small businesses who qualify for this program work with nonprofit research institutions in the early and intermediate stages of starting up. Find out if the STTR program makes sense(link is external) for your business. Need help? Get free business counseling Find counselors Last updated May 19, 2023 Return to top About SBA Contact SBA Locations Upcoming events Newsroom SBA blog Leadership team About the site Site map Privacy policy Linking policy Plain language Accessibility Disclaimers Open government Freedom of Information Act No Fear Act Open data sources Policies and guidance Budget and performance Regulations.gov Oversight Inspector General Advocacy Hearings and appeals Ombudsman Fraud and identity theft WhiteHouse.gov USA.gov Sign up Receive information about upcoming SBA events, news alerts, and program updates. * indicates a required field Email ZIP Code Your information will only be used in accordance with our website privacy policy. U.S. Small Business Administration 409 3rd St., SW Washington, DC 20416 800-827-5722