GOV.UK Menu Home Money and tax Income Tax Tax on savings interest Contents How much tax you pay Previous tax years How much tax you pay Most people can earn some interest from their savings without paying tax. Your allowances for earning interest before you have to pay tax on it include: your Personal Allowance starting rate for savings Personal Savings Allowance You get these allowances each tax year. How much you get depends on your other income. The tax year runs from 6 April to 5 April the following year. This guide is also available in Welsh (Cymraeg). Personal Allowance You can use your Personal Allowance to earn interest tax-free if you have not used it up on your wages, pension or other income. Starting rate for savings You may also get up to £5,000 of interest and not have to pay tax on it. This is your starting rate for savings. The more you earn from other income (for example your wages or pension), the less your starting rate for savings will be. If your other income is £17,570 or more You’re not eligible for the starting rate for savings if your other income is £17,570 or more. If your other income is less than £17,570 Your starting rate for savings is a maximum of £5,000. Every £1 of other income above your Personal Allowance reduces your starting rate for savings by £1. Example You earn £16,000 of wages and get £200 interest on your savings. Your Personal Allowance is £12,570. It’s used up by the first £12,570 of your wages. The remaining £3,430 of your wages (£16,000 minus £12,570) reduces your starting rate for savings by £3,430. Your remaining starting rate for savings is £1,570 (£5,000 minus £3,430). This means you will not have to pay tax on your £200 savings interest. Personal Savings Allowance You may also get up to £1,000 of interest and not have to pay tax on it, depending on which Income Tax band you’re in. This is your Personal Savings Allowance. To work out your tax band, add all the interest you’ve received to your other income. Income Tax band Personal Savings Allowance Basic rate £1,000 Higher rate £500 Additional rate £0 Interest covered by your allowance Your allowance applies to interest from: bank and building society accounts savings and credit union accounts unit trusts, investment trusts and open-ended investment companies peer-to-peer lending trust funds payment protection insurance (PPI) government or company bonds life annuity payments some life insurance contracts Savings in tax-free accounts like Individual Savings Accounts (ISAs) and some National Savings and Investments accounts do not count towards your allowance. There are different rules for tax on foreign savings and children’s accounts. Interest on joint accounts If you have a joint account, interest will be split equally between the account holders. Contact the savings helpline if you think it should be split differently. If you go over your allowance You pay tax on any interest over your allowance at your usual rate of Income Tax. If you’re employed or get a pension, HMRC will change your tax code so you pay the tax automatically. To decide your tax code, HMRC will estimate how much interest you’ll get in the current year by looking at how much you got the previous year. If you complete a Self Assessment tax return, report any interest earned on savings there. You need to register for Self Assessment if your income from savings and investments is over £10,000. Check if you need to send a tax return if you’re not sure. If you’re not employed, do not get a pension or do not complete Self Assessment, your bank or building society will tell HMRC how much interest you received at the end of the year. HMRC will tell you if you need to pay tax and how to pay it. If you already paid tax on your savings income You can reclaim tax paid on your savings interest if it was below your allowance. You must reclaim your tax within 4 years of the end of the relevant tax year. You can claim through your Self-Assessment Tax Return if you complete one. If not, fill in form R40 and send it to HMRC. It normally takes 6 weeks to get the tax back. Next Previous tax years View a printable version of the whole guide Related content Income Tax: introduction Get help with tax Working out your income for tax credit claims and renewals Collection Tax on savings and investments: detailed information Explore the topic Income Tax Is this page useful? Yes No Report a problem with this page Services and information Benefits Births, death, marriages and care Business and self-employed Childcare and parenting Citizenship and living in the UK Crime, justice and the law Disabled people Driving and transport Education and learning Employing people Environment and countryside Housing and local services Money and tax Passports, travel and living abroad Visas and immigration Working, jobs and pensions Government activity Departments News Guidance and regulation Research and statistics Policy papers and consultations Transparency How government works Get involved Help Privacy Cookies Accessibility statement Contact Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg Government Digital Service All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated © Crown copyright