Latest advice and support straight to your inbox SIGN UP Guides Resources News Events Home Guides Grow your business Assessing current performance Business assets Difference between assets and liabilities Guide In business terms, assets and liabilities often appear together. They are the two fundamental elements that shape the financial health of your business and make up your company' balance sheet. What are assets? Assets are resources (tangible and intangible) that your business owns, and that can provide you with future economic benefit. They add value to your business, they can help you meet your commitments and increase your equity. What are liabilities? Liabilities are your business' debts or obligations which you need to fulfil in the future. This is the money you need to repay, the goods you need to provide or the services you need to perform. These responsibilities arise out of past transactions and need to be settled through the company's assets. Both assets and liabilities are reported on the company's balance sheet. While some assets are depreciable, liabilities are not - they do not diminish in value over time. See more on depreciation of assets. Examples of assets and liabilities Just as there are different types of business assets, there are two broad categories of liabilities. Depending on their maturity, liabilities can be either current or non-current. Current liabilities Current liabilities are those due within the present accounting year, such as: bank overdrafts accounts payable, eg payments to your suppliers sales taxes payroll taxes income taxes wages short term loans outstanding expenses Non-current liabilities Non-current liabilities are those financial obligations that are not due for settlement within one year during the normal course of business. Also known as long-term liabilities, they include: bonds payable capital leases mortgage debt long-term borrowing pension liabilities deferred revenues and taxes securities, such as stock shares or bonds notes payable In the balance sheet, you need to take into consideration both your assets and your liabilities to accurately reflect your business' financial position. Book traversal links for Difference between assets and liabilities ‹ Intangible assets up Importance of assets in business › In this guide: Introduction Different types of business assets Tangible assets Intangible assets Difference between assets and liabilities Importance of assets in business Business asset valuation Managing assets in business Protecting your business assets Transferring and selling assets Printer-friendly version Institute of Asset Management Helpline 0117 450 4990 Actions What is a liability? What are assets? Asset management resources Also on this site Financial and management accounts Decide whether to lease or buy assets Our free monthly newsletter brings you business advice, local support, news and events You can opt-out from receiving our newsletter at any time by selecting the unsubscribe link that is in every email we send. For more information on how we use your data, read our privacy policy. Provided by In partnership with nibusinessinfo.co.uk, a free service offered by Invest Northern Ireland, is the official online channel for business advice and guidance in Northern Ireland. Contact details nibusinessinfo.co.uk Bedford Square Bedford Street Belfast BT2 7ES 0800 181 4422 About us Accessibility Contact us Cookies Cookie settings Copyright Privacy Policy Sitemap Terms and conditions Creative industries Food and drink Manufacturing Property management Retail Construction Tourism Transport Starting a business Finance Taxes Employment and skills Health and safety Efficiency and environment Business premises and rates Innovation and R&D Sales and marketing IT Exporting and importing Grow your business Buy or sell a business