Skip to main content Apply now Log in to Online Banking Current accounts Business banking Overdrafts & Loans Money transfers About Blog & News Careers Help Business guidesUp and runningRunning a businessGross profit vs net profit Taking off Starting up Accountancy Invoicing Up and running Running a business What is business insurance? Keeping your company information up to date Gross profit vs net profit What is cost of sales and how is it calculated? Hiring your first employee What is payroll and how to pay your employees Why you still need a business card How much cash reserve should I keep? Giving your business a regular health check Practical support to help your business go green How to calculate your carbon emissions Strategy Tax VAT Running a business Gross profit vs net profit Gross profit and net profit sound like jargon, but they are both important measures of how well your business is doing. They tell you critical things about your business’s financial health and it’s important to understand what they mean. What is gross profit? Gross profit on a product is the selling price of your product minus the cost of producing it. For a service business, it’s the selling price of your service minus the cost of the time spent doing the job. Gross profit also refers to total sales (also known as revenue or turnover) minus the total cost of sales. It’s vital to understand your gross profit so that you are not selling at a loss. What is included in gross profit? Gross profit includes the costs of selling the item such as delivery charges to ship to the customer and any sales commissions. It also includes the cost of getting the items from the supplier to you, such as delivery (‘carriage’ in accounting terms) and any modifications that you make to it before sale. How to calculate gross profit If you buy in items to sell then this is fairly straightforward. For instance, an item might cost £50 plus £5 delivery from the supplier. If you sell this for £100 then your gross profit is £100 – £50 – £5 =£45 Some people prefer to also think about this as a percentage of sales which can be referred to as a gross profit margin (GP%). In this example the gross profit percentage is £45/£100 x 100 = 45% If you manufacture, then your gross profit calculation will be more complex. For instance it might cost £25 of raw materials and £20 of labour to produce an item that you sell for £100. In this case your gross profit would be £100 - £25 - £20 = £55. And the GP% would be £55/£100 x 100 = 55% What is a good gross profit margin? This really depends on what you are selling, the market you operate in and what your other costs are. In retail it is traditionally around 50%. This might sound like a lot until you take into account your overheads such as rent. Tracking all your costs through the Starling Business Toolkit will help enable you to keep an eye on your gross profit and to ensure that you are not selling at a loss. If you’re making a gross loss then, the more you sell, the more you lose. Sometimes people talk about profit markup instead of profit margin. We cover the difference between the two in our article on How to price a product. What is net profit? Net profit is the selling price of your good minus ALL the costs of running your business. This is the figure that we usually mean when we refer to profit (but it’s always worth checking). What is included in net profit? Net profit includes the same costs as your gross profit AND your overheads or fixed costs such as salaries, rent, software and bank charges (if your bank charges these - Starling doesn’t charge monthly fees on the regular business account). How to calculate net profit If you use the Business Toolkit the taxable net profit is calculated for you. The tax section has a profit and loss tab that shows the taxable profit as well as the taxable income and allowable expenses. It is the gross profit minus any fixed costs. If you have a gross profit of £5,000, rent of £1,000, salaries of £3,500, £100 of software and £20 bank charges then your net profit is £5,000 - £1,000 - £3,500 - £100 - £20 = £380 This can also be shown as a percentage of sales (net profit margin). If the sales in our example were £10,000 then the net profit percentage would be £380/£10,000 x 100 = 3.8% Net profit is usually considered before tax What is a good net profit margin? Again this depends on what sort of business you are in but 10% would be fairly normal. If the business owner is taking a low salary then you should be aiming for much higher than this figure. Gross profit vs net profit Gross profit is the sales income minus the direct costs of getting the article to sale. Net profit is the sales income minus all the business costs. This is often shown as the formula: Sales - Direct costs = Gross profit - Overheads = Net profits This article is intended as general information only and does not constitute advice in any way. For any specific questions, you may want to consult your legal advisor or accountant. SHARE Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share on LinkedIn Go back to all articles Related Articles How to calculate your carbon emissions How much cash reserve should I keep? Hiring your first employee Giving your business a regular health check Keeping your company information up to date Apply for a Starling bank account today and enjoy app-based banking at its best. Start your application Company About Starling Annual Report & Pillar 3 Careers Charity Partnerships Corporate Governance Statement Ethics statement Gender equality If Not Now, When? Initiative Newsroom Refer a friend scheme Tax strategy Women in Finance Charter Legal All legal documents FSCS Protection Privacy Notice Modern Slavery Statement Carbon Reduction Plan Manage cookies Customer support Cost of living APP Scams Code Banking glossary Customer support hub Fees, rates and charges Help centre How to contact us Responsible Disclosure Security and fraud Service status Website accessibility Social media community guidelines Partner with us Accountant referral programme B2B Banking Services Developers Engine by Starling Lending Partnership Programme Connect with us Subscribe to Starling Subscribe Starling Bank is registered in England and Wales as Starling Bank Limited (No. 09092149), 5th Floor, London Fruit And Wool Exchange, 1 Duval Square, London, E1 6PW. We are authorised by the Prudential Regulation Authority and regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority and the Prudential Regulation Authority under registration number 730166. © Starling Bank 2024. All rights reserved. Help