ADVISOR UK Advisor Investing Advertiser Disclosure How To Invest In Stocks & Shares Jo Groves Forbes Staff Updated: Oct 9, 2023, 2:25pm Reviewed By Kevin Pratt Editor Important Disclosure: The content provided does not consider your particular circumstances and does not constitute personal advice. Some of the products promoted are from our affiliate partners from whom we receive compensation. Read More Capital at Risk. All investments carry a varying degree of risk and it’s important you understand the nature of the risks involved. The value of your investments can go down as well as up and you may get back less than you put in. Read More Table of Contents What are stocks and shares? What are the different ways to invest in shares? What are the options for share dealing? What type of accounts can shares be held in? How to choose which shares to invest in Show more Investing in stocks and shares allows investors to buy and own part of a publicly listed company. This provides the opportunity to make a profit if the share price rises, although there is also a risk of losing money. While interest rates have risen significantly, soaring inflation has made it challenging for savers to find inflation-beating returns. However, returns from equities (such as stocks and shares) have historically outstripped cash returns over a long term period, though investing puts one’s capital at risk. According to research by robo-advisor Moneyfarm, average annual returns from cash ISAs were 1.2% from 2012 to 2022. However, the average annual return rose to 7.4% for a stocks and shares ISA invested in the FTSE 100, and an even higher annual return of 12.5% for an ISA invested in global equities. With inflation topping 11% last year in the UK, investing in stocks and shares could provide investors with an opportunity to generate a ‘real’ return, in other words, a return that beats inflation. This quest for inflation-beating returns has prompted a rise in the popularity of investing amongst private investors. According to the recent Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) Financial Lives Survey, 41% of adults held an investment product in 2022, a rise from the 37% in 2020. Let’s take a closer look at what investors may want to know about investing in stocks and shares. What are stocks and shares? Shares are units of ownership in a company and are issued by a company to raise funds. Although the terms ‘stocks’ and ‘shares’ are often used interchangeably, a share is an individual unit of ownership, whereas a stock denotes more general ownership. Or, put another way, an investor might ‘own stock’ in Barclays with a holding of 100 shares. Only shares in publicly-traded companies are available to buy or sell on a stock exchange. In the UK, these companies have ‘plc’ or ‘public limited company’ at the end of their name and there are over 1,880 companies listed on the London Stock Exchange for investors to choose from. Alternatively, many platforms also offer trading in shares listed on overseas stock exchanges. According to a recent survey by broker Charles Schwab, two-thirds of UK investors currently rank the US as the most attractive market to invest in, with the choice of more than 5,000 shares on the Nasdaq and New York stock exchanges. Featured Partner Offer 1 eToro Stop paying commission on stocks Buy commission-free stocks on eToro Own Stocks On eToro's Website Your capital is at risk. Other fees apply. For more information, visit etoro.com/trading/fees. What are the different ways to invest in shares? It’s possible to invest in shares directly or indirectly, as follows: Invest directly in individual shares: buying shares in individual companies may be an option if investors are confident in carrying out their own research and keeping abreast of market developments. However, it’s a relatively risky option given it puts ‘all the eggs in one basket’. Invest indirectly via funds: professionally-managed funds pool money from investors to invest in a basket of shares and other assets such as bonds and property. There’s a wide range of options covering different assets, sectors and geographies. There are three main types of funds to choose from: Open-ended investment companies (OEICs): investors can buy units in OEICs (often just referred to as ‘funds’) which rise and fall in value in line with the underlying assets. These are generally actively-managed. Exchange-traded funds (ETFs): investors can buy shares in an ETF (often called ‘tracker’ or ‘index’ funds), the value of which will change with the underlying index they track. These are usually passively-managed. Investment trusts: also known ‘close-ended investments’, investors can also buy shares in an investment trust. They are mostly actively-managed but, unlike OEICs, the share price may differ from the underlying value of the investments. Depending on its investment mandate, a fund is either ‘active’ or ‘passively’ managed: Actively-managed funds: the fund manager will try to outperform a benchmark or index through active stock-picking, and typically charges a higher annual management charge of 0.5% to 1.0%. Passively-managed funds: also known as ‘tracker’ or ‘index’ funds, these aim to replicate an index such as the FTSE 100, and generally charge a lower annual management charge of 0.1% to 0.2%. What are the options for share dealing? Using a trading platform A popular way of investing in shares is via a trading platform. There are a range of options from banks to investment providers such as AJ Bell, interactive investor and Fidelity. The FCA reports that almost 10% of UK adults hold their investments on a direct-to-consumer, or ‘DIY’ platform. It’s worth comparing the fees charged by different providers as these can vary considerably and erode the value of a portfolio over time. We’ve compared fees, along with other features, in our pick of the best trading platforms. Using a financial advisor Another option is to buy and sell shares via a financial advisor or wealth manager. Many of the online platforms also offer discretionary wealth management services for clients with higher-value portfolios (typically over £100,000). A suitably-qualified financial advisor should be able to recommend shares based on individual investment objectives, and execute the trades on their behalf. However, this will be a higher cost option than using an online platform. Using a robo-advisor Robo-advisors have grown in popularity as a hybrid option between DIY investing and a financial advisor. They use computer algorithms to construct an automated portfolio tailored to an investor’s appetite for risk. Robo-advisors are a relatively simple, low-cost way of investing in shares, generally via ETFs and index funds rather than individual shares. We’ve reviewed the options available in our pick of the best robo-advisers. What type of accounts can shares be held in? Shares and funds can be held in a general trading or investment account, or in a tax-efficient wrapper such as an Individual Savings Account (ISA) or Self-Invested Personal Pension (SIPP). Investments held in these accounts are free from income and capital gains tax. Given that the capital gains allowance has halved to £6,000 in the current (2023-2024) tax year and will halve again next year, this could help investors shield any gains from tax. To help investors compare the options on offer, we’ve produced a guide to our pick of the best ISA providers and SIPP providers. How to choose which shares to invest in Before making investment decisions, investors should conduct their own research and consult a financial advisor if needed. The composition of an investment portfolio will depend on an individual’s personal investment objectives, including their tolerance for risk and time horizon. According to the recent FCA Financial Lives Survey, these were the top 10 investment objectives among UK investors in 2023: Perhaps unsurprisingly, 18-34 year olds were most likely to invest in order to build a pot for a major expense or to supplement their income. Whereas 55-64 years old tended to invest to generate an income in retirement, and over 65 year olds to cover the cost of long-term care or to leave an inheritance. For investors considering buying shares, we produce a monthly guide to the most bought and sold shares by UK investors. We’ve also produced guides to our pick of the best stocks to buy now, best stocks to buy and hold and best artificial intelligence stocks. We’ve also produced a number of guides to funds, including our pick of the best UK funds, best global funds and best funds when interest rates rise. Choosing between income and capital growth The choice of shares will also depend on whether investors are primarily looking for returns from capital growth or income, but what’s the difference? One of the main aims of investing is to make a profit by selling shares for a higher price than the purchase price, also known as a capital gain (or growth). Alternatively, investors may want a regular income, usually in the form of dividends paid to shareholders. On the whole, there’s a trade-off between capital growth and income. Typically, the higher-dividend paying shares (often found in the commodity and financial sectors) deliver less in the way of capital growth than the lower-dividend paying shares (such as the large US technology companies). For income-seeking investors, we’ve produced a guide to our pick of the best dividend-paying shares and exchange-traded funds (ETFs). For more growth-oriented investors, we’ve also taken a look at our pick of the best growth stocks and technology stocks. How to set a budget for stock market investments Before setting a budget for investing, most financial advisors recommend that individuals pay off any debt, such as credit cards or personal loans at higher interest rates. It’s also important to put aside enough money in savings accounts to cover at least three to six months of expenses, in case of unexpected costs. In terms of investing in the stock market, it’s generally recommended that the minimum time frame is at least five years, which gives time for stock markets to recover from any downturns. The next step is to consider individual investment objectives and attitude to risk. Risk-averse investors may prefer to put more money in lower-risk options (such as savings accounts) and a lower amount in higher-risk stock market investments. With any stock market investment, there is the risk of losing some (or all) of the money invested so individuals should only invest money that they are willing to lose if the worst happens. How can investors buy and sell shares? Step 1: Open a trading account Accounts can usually be opened online and in as little as 10 minutes. Applicants will need to provide some basic information, such as their bank account and National Insurance details. Electronic checks may be carried out during the initial application process, although applicants may have to supply further documents to support the verification of their identity. Featured Partner Offer 1 eToro Stop paying commission on stocks Buy commission-free stocks on eToro Own Stocks On eToro's Website Your capital is at risk. Other fees apply. For more information, visit etoro.com/trading/fees. Step 2: Add funds to the account Once the account is open, the next step is to fund the account via a debit card or electronic bank transfer. For individual shares, investors will generally need enough money to buy at least one share. However, some trading platforms offer fractional shares where investors can buy less than one share. This is particularly useful for some of the US companies with high share prices. For funds, investors can buy a fraction of a unit, but some platforms may have a minimum lump sum investment of £50 to £100 for funds. This can be beneficial if share prices fall as investors pay the average cost over a period of time. Step 3: Place the trade Shares on the London Stock Exchange can be traded from 8 am to 4.30 pm on weekdays. After logging into the account, the next step is to search for the name (or ticker) of the fund or company. At this point, the investor will be given a live quote which they can choose to accept (or let lapse). There is typically the option to either choose the number of shares to buy, or the value of the investment to be made. Most companies have a ‘buy-sell’ spread, which is effectively the profit that the provider will make