All CIPD websites For organisations For your role About us Help Login / Register Join the CIPD The people profession Views and insights Topics Knowledge hub Learning Membership Get involved Home Knowledge hub Factsheets PESTLE analysis PESTLE analysis Discover what PESTLE means, and use our PESTLE analysis template and example to explore the external influences on your organisation FACTSHEET 13 Mar, 2024 ALL LOCATIONS ORGANISATIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN A PESTLE analysis studies the key external factors (Political, Economic, Sociological, Technological, Legal and Environmental) that influence an organisation. It can be used in a range of different scenarios, and can guide people professionals and senior managers in strategic decision making. On this page What is a PESTLE analysis? How to do a PESTLE analysis PESTLE analysis tips What is a PESTLE analysis used for? Advantages and disadvantages of a PESTLE analysis Useful contacts and further reading What is a PESTLE analysis? What is a PESTLE analysis and how does it work? Transcript How to do a PESTLE analysis PESTLE analysis tips What is a PESTLE analysis used for? Advantages and disadvantages of a PESTLE analysis Useful contacts and further reading Blank PESTLE template PDF Blank PESTLE template PDF PDF document 216.5 KB Completed PESTLE example PDF Completed PESTLE example PDF PDF document 61.6 KB This factsheet was last updated by Michelle Battista: Learning Community and Content Curator, CIPD Michelle oversees the CIPD learning communities and the curation and presentation of learning to support professional development. Share Related content FACTSHEETS SWOT analysis Learn about the SWOT framework, the process of a SWOT analysis, and its advantages and disadvantages FACTSHEETS Job design Explores the purpose and evolution of job design, its role in creating good work, and assessing job quality. FACTSHEETS Organisation development Explores what organisation development is and how it's carried out in today’s organisations PODCASTS Is your organisation ready for the ChatGPT of things? Episode 195: At the crest of change, explore how business leaders and people professionals should prepare their organisations to maximise the opportunities presented by ChatGPT and artificial intelligence technologies Explore our other factsheets FACTSHEETS SWOT analysis Learn about the SWOT framework, the process of a SWOT analysis, and its advantages and disadvantages FACTSHEETS Employer-supported volunteering Learn about embedding employer-supported volunteering in your organisation, different types of opportunities and why it matters FACTSHEETS Absence measurement and management Learn how to measure sickness absence, the main components of an absence policy, and how to address short- and long-term absence in an organisation. FACTSHEETS People analytics Understand what people analytics is, different types of HR data, and the importance of people analytics strategy and process Factsheets TOP CIPD websites Visit our websites for the latest information and development. Learning hub Explore our professional development learning platform. People Management Keep up with the latest HR and L&D news. Learning shop Find the right course for you. Bookshop A shop provided by Kogan Page for CIPD students Join the CIPD Enjoy exclusive access to resources, connections, events and support to further develop yourself professionally. Become a member Qualifications and learning Products and services Join our online community Get involved Careers at the CIPD Join the debate on our social channels. Contact and help Find help and support or contact us. Help Membership help Learning help Profession Map FAQs Connect with our teams around the world Contact us © Copyright The Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development 2024, 151 The Broadway, London, SW19 1JQ, United Kingdom. Incorporated by Royal Charter. Registered as a charity in England and Wales (1079797), Scotland (SCO45154) and Ireland (20100827). Accessibility Privacy policy Cookie policy Terms and conditions Modern slavery statement