Filings for AY 2023-24 have been stopped. We will notify you once ITR filings for AY 2024-25 are enabled. Products Resources Company Login/Signup Filing for AY 2024-25 is coming soon Keep calm and sign up for early access to our super filing platform Sign me up BROWSE BY TOPICS Income Tax e-Filing Last Date To File ITR For 2022-23 Income Tax Slabs FY 2023-24 Which Is Better: Old vs New Tax Regime For Salaried Employees? House Property Business, Professional &amp; Freelance Which ITR Should I File? Income Tax Refunds Paying Tax Due Salary Income Capital Gains Income Other income sources Advance Tax NRI HUF Income Tax Notices POPULAR ARTICLES Budget 2023 Highlights: PDF Download, Key Takeaways, Important Points Budget 2022 Highlights : PDF Download, Key Takeaways, Important Points 47th GST Council meeting: Latest News, Highlights and Updates 46th GST Council Meeting: Latest News, Highlights and Updates How to file ITR Online – Step by Step Guide to Efile Income Tax Return, FY 2021-22 (AY 2022-23) House Rent Allowance (HRA) - What is House Rent Allowance, HRA Exemption And Tax Deduction Form 15G, Form 15H to Save TDS on Interest Income Income Tax Deductions under Sec 80 CCD(1B) Best Technology Mutual Funds in India 2023 ITR U – What is ITR-U Form and How to File ITR-U RELATED ARTICLES EPFO Claim Status - EPF Claim Status Check Online Sections 206AB and 206CCA of Income Tax: Analysis, Applicability and FAQs Sukanya Samriddhi Yojana (SSY) – Interest Rate 2023, Tax Benefits, Eligibility, Bank List, Age Limit & Other Details Section 80G – Donations Eligible Under Section 80G and 80GGA – 80G Exemption List How to save tax when you miss the income tax proof submission deadline Opening a PPF account in HDFC Opening a PPF Account With SBI PAN Card Download – 4 Ways to Download e-PAN Card Online Via NSDL, UTIITSL, AADHAAR, and e-Filing Website EPFO Grievance PM Kisan – pmkisan.gov.in Registration, Beneficiary Status Check, 13th Installment Updates Form 15G, Form 15H to Save TDS on Interest Income Form 26AS – What is Form 26AS? View & Download Form 26AS Online YOU MIGHT BE INTERESTED IN Benefits of invoicing software for small businesses HOME INCOME TAX 80C-80-DEDUCTIONS 6 WAYS TO SAVE INCOME TAX ON NEW & OLD TAX REGIME FOR FY 2023-24 6 Ways to Save Income Tax On New & Old Tax Regime for FY 2023-24 Updated on: Mar 27th, 2024 | 21 min read As the famous saying goes, ‘A penny saved is a penny earned‘. Tax planning is one of the ways that will help you save on taxes and increase your income. The Income Tax Act provides deductions for various investments, savings and expenditures incurred by the taxpayer in a particular financial year. We invest in various products that improve our quality of life but can also cause considerable financial distress. The government offers income tax exemptions on direct taxes charged on your whole pay to alleviate this burden. We will discuss some avenues to help you save taxes under the old and new tax regimes. Tax saving deductions and exemptions under the new tax regime Under the new tax regime, only limited tax deductions are available for taxpayers. Hence, opting for the new tax regime is a good option if you have a minimum investment. However, the tax slab rates are concessional compared to the old tax regime. Deductions that are applicable in the new tax regime are as follows: Employer contribution to NPS u/s 80CCD(2) Under section 80CCD(2), the deduction is available for the employer’s contribution to NPS. This benefit is available to individuals who receive a salary and not to self-employed individuals. An employer can contribute to the NPS contribution even if they have contributed to the PPF and EPF funds. The contribution made by the employer may be equal to or higher than the contribution made by the employee. If you are a central government employee, you can claim a deduction of up to 14% of your employer’s salary(Basic+DA). However, if you are a non-government employee, you can claim a maximum of 10% of your salary (Basic+DA). The amount that your employer contributes will be deducted from your employee payslip and deposited into your NPS account. There is an overall threshold of Rs 750,000 for employer contribution to PF, NPS, and Superannuation. Amount paid or deposited in the Agniveer Corpus Fund under Section 80CCH(2) The Income Tax Act states that the total amount the applicants and the central government contribute to the Agniveer Corpus Fund will be eligible for deduction under section 80CCH(2). The act also states that an exemption will be allowed if the applicant or the nominees receive such an income under the Agnipath Scheme. Soldiers enrolled in this scheme will get all the benefits like ration, risk and hardships, travel, etc. Death and disability compensation is also available for the candidates. This deduction is now available under both regimes. Deduction under Section 57(iia) of family pension income Family pension refers to the amount the employer pays to the employee’s family in the event of the employee's death. A sum equal to ⅓ of the income received by the employee or Rs 15,000, whichever is lower among the two, will be allowed as a deduction under section 57( iia) of the family pension. Interest on Home Loan on Let-out Property under Section 24 Under the new tax regime, interest on a home loan for self-occupied property is prohibited under section 24. Whereas interest on a home loan on the let-out property is allowed as a deduction without any upper limit. Transport Allowance and Conveyance allowance Transport allowance means the allowance given to the employee by the employer to compensate for the travel expenses incurred for commuting between his place of residence and work. The exemption allowed, from FY 2018-19 onwards, will be Rs 1,600 per month and Rs. 3,200 per month for a physically challenged employee commuting from his place of residence to the place of duty. Conveyance allowance is granted to meet the expenditure incurred during the performance of office duty. However, conveyance allowance is exempt only to the extent of actual expenditure incurred. Exemptions for Voluntary Retirement Scheme u/ Section 10(10C), Gratuity Amount u/ Section 10(10) and Leave Encashment u/ Section 10(10AA). Under the new tax regime, certain exemptions under section 10 were not allowed. However, certain exemptions are now allowable. Let us discuss the exemptions allowed. A voluntary retirement scheme is offered by employers so that employees can retire voluntarily. The amount exempt under this section is Rs. 5 lakh. Individuals who receive gratuity under section 10(10), if they are government employees and then the gratuity received is fully exempt. Whereas if the employee is in private employment, then exemption on the same depends on whether they are covered under the Payment of Gratuity Act. Leave encashment is when the employee encashs all the paid leave at the time of his retirement or resignation. The maximum amount exempt has been increased to Rs. 25 lakhs as per the New Finance Bills, 2023, and the amount exceeding will be taxable. Tax saving deductions and exemptions under the old tax regime Unlike the new tax regime, deductions and exemptions are allowed under the old tax regime, which gives taxpayers the benefit of paying lower tax liability. Below are the deductions available to save tax under the old tax regime. Buy a home loan and enjoy tax benefits under Section 80C Numerous government-mandated programs, such as the PMAY (Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana) and DDR (Delhi Development Authority) Housing Scheme, aim to make housing more accessible in India. At the same time, Sections 80C and 24(b) minimize monetary liability through lower tax burdens. Whole annual income spent on repayment of the principal borrowed amount is eligible for Section 80C deductions of up to 1.5 lakh. Section 24(b) allows for tax exemption on the interest portion of a house loan up to Rs 2 lakh per year. Furthermore, if you rent out the newly purchased home, the entire interest component is deductible from your rental income. However, to set off losses against other heads of income will be limited to Rs. 200,000. Section 80EEA allows you to claim an additional deduction in your annual tax liability if you are a first-time homeowner and satisfy the other conditions underlying the same. Buy a health insurance policy People can claim tax deductions under Section 80D for the portion of their annual taxable income spent on premium payments. Depending on the age of the covered, different sums are exempt from such income tax computations. Section 80D deduction limits are as follows: Particular Amount Medical insurance for Self and Family Rs. 25,000 (Rs. 50,000 in case of senior citizen) Medical insurance for parents Rs 25,000 (Rs. 50,000 in case of senior citizen) Preventive Health Checkup Rs 5,000 per year Medical expenditure incurred towards parents (Senior citizens) not having health insurance. Rs 50,000 Park your money in government schemes Numerous government-mandated schemes offer high returns on total investments along with tax waivers. Individuals can claim up to Rs 1.5 lakh spent on such investments as tax waivers on total annual income under Section 80C of the Income Tax Act. Tax exemptions can be availed by investing in the following tools: Senior Citizen Savings Scheme (SCSS) Sukanya Samriddhi Yojana (SSY) National Pension Scheme (NPS) Public Provident Fund (PPF) National Pension Scheme (NPS) Buy life insurance plans Section 80C of the Income Tax Act provides for premium payments, and Section 10(10D) provides for the sum promised received at maturity or early death of the insured, whichever occurs first. Yet, if the insurance is bought after 1st April 2012, tax benefits of up to Rs 1.5 lakh paid on annual premiums can be claimed under Section 80C, provided it is less than 10% of the entire sum assured. If the policy was purchased before April 1, 2012, claims under Section 80C can be filed as long as the total premium payments do not exceed 20% of the sum guaranteed. As per the Finance Act 2023, in the case of ULIP exemption, u/s 10(10D) is applicable only if the premium is less than Rs. 250,000 per year. As per the Finance Act 2023, in the case of any other insurance policy (Other than ULIP), exemption u/ 10(10D) is applicable only if the premium is less than Rs 500,000 per year. Acquisition or renewal of life insurance coverage, as well as annuity payments on such plans made through monthly salary, are also eligible for tax exemptions of up to Rs 1.5 lakh under Section 80CCC. Only certain pension funds under section 23AAB are eligible for exemptions of up to Rs 1.5 lakh under section 80CCD(1). Investment options under Section 80C The most popular tax-saving options available to individuals and HUFs in India are under Section 80C of the Income Tax Act, Section 80C includes various investments and expenses you can claim deductions on – up to the limit of Rs. 1.5 lakh in a financial year. Investment Returns Lock-in Period 5-Year Bank Fixed Deposit 6% to 7% 5 years Public Provident Fund (PPF) 7% to 8% 15 years National Savings Certificate 7% to 8% 5 years National Pension System (NPS) 12% to 14% Till Retirement ELSS Funds 15% to 18% 3 years Unit Linked Insurance Plan (ULIP) Varies with Plan Chosen 5 years Sukanya Samriddhi Yojana (SSY) 8.20% N/A Senior Citizen Saving Scheme (SCSS) 8.20% 5 years Other Tax Saving options beyond Section 80C Apart from the 80C deductions, there are various deductions under Section 80 you can use to save on income tax. Tax benefits on health insurance premiums and home loan interest are a few- Interest paid on a home loan can be claimed as a deduction under section 24 up to Rs 2 lakh. Section 80EE also allows you to claim a deduction of up to Rs 50,000 on home loan interest, which is over and above the limit of Section 24. Any charity that is made to institutions or funds can be claimed as a deduction under section 80G. Interest paid on education loans is allowed as a deduction under section 80E Employer contribution to NPS is eligible for deduction u/s 80CCD(2) with an overall threshold of Rs 750,000 (Including Employer contribution to PF). Individual contributions to NPS