Recipes How To Reviews Chefs News Inspiration World's most delicious dishes you'll want to try Gallery View| Expand View Around the world, one plate at a time Marie Sonmez Photography/Shutterstock The best travels always involve plenty of food, from iconic national dishes to lesser-known local specialities. And every recipe comes with its own fascinating story. Here, we look at some of the world's most delicious dishes that everyone should try at least once, whether that's cooked at home, sampled in a restaurant or (best of all) enjoyed in its place or origin. Click or scroll through our gallery to discover the world's most delicious dishes, counting down to the tastiest of all. We've based our ranking on the enduring popularity of each dish in its place of origin and beyond, and on the opinions of our well-travelled (and well-fed) team. The list is unavoidably subjective. 84. Peri peri chicken, Mozambique Tatiana Bralnina/Shutterstock We’ve probably got restaurant chain Nando’s to thank for popularising this deliciously spicy dish around the world, but peri peri (or piri piri) chicken is believed to have originated in southern Africa, particularly Mozambique, where Portuguese explorers and settlers introduced chilli peppers to the local cuisine. To make it, chicken pieces are marinated in a punchy sauce made from crushed chilli peppers, garlic, citrus juice, vinegar and various spices and herbs, before being grilled or roasted to juicy perfection. 83. Sauerbraten, Germany AS Food studio/Shutterstock The national dish of Germany, sauerbraten is a traditional pot roast, made with beef rump that's marinated for days in vinegar or red wine (or both), mixed with water, herbs and spices. It's then served with a rich, sweet-sour gravy. Many people think the meal dates back to the 9th century, when Charlemagne was King of the Franks, while others say that Julius Caesar was the inspiration behind the dish; it's believed that he sent amphoras filled with beef marinated in wine to the new Roman colony of Cologne. 82. Massaman, Thailand Joshua Resnick/Shutterstock This truly excellent Thai curry is known for its balance of sweet, savoury and spicy flavours, with a subtle heat that’s tempered by the creaminess of coconut milk. Massaman is traditionally made with bone-in, skin-on chicken for maximum punch, and one of its distinguishing features is the inclusion of potatoes and peanuts, which add a unique dimension to the dish. It’s believed to have originated in southern Thailand with heavy influences from Persian and Indian cuisines, particularly Muslim traders who brought spices such as cardamom, cinnamon and cloves to the region. 81. Spanakopita, Cyprus and Greece RFondren Photography/Shutterstock This sumptuous savoury pastry features a gooey filling of spinach, feta, onions, eggs and various herbs and spices, stuffed between thin sheets of filo pastry, then baked until perfectly golden and crispy. Its exact origins are difficult to pinpoint, but spanakopita is thought to have originated more than 400 years ago. Typically sold in Mediterranean bakeries, it has also become a symbol of Greek hospitality and is often served at celebrations, festivals and family gatherings. 80. Cassoulet, France Foodio/Shutterstock Cassoulet is a rich and hearty French dish originating from the Languedoc-Roussillon region in the southwest of France. It’s a slow-cooked delight traditionally simmered in an earthenware pot and made with white beans (almost always haricot) and various meats, all simmered together in a flavourful broth with plenty of aromatics. The ingredients in a cassoulet will vary depending on the region, but can include duck confit, pork shoulder, Toulouse sausage, goose or lamb. 79. Banitsa, Bulgaria GK1982/Shutterstock This Bulgarian breakfast pastry can be served hot or cold, and is often eaten with plain yogurt, ayran (a traditional yogurt drink) or boza (a fermented malt drink) – in much the same way as the French would eat a croissant. It's made by rolling up a filling of yogurt, eggs and cheese in filo pastry, then wrapping the whole thing into a spiral shape. Hidden treats or messages are often added on special occasions. 78. Barramundi, Australia Lifestyle Travel Photo/Shutterstock Barramundi is synonymous with Australian cuisine; you'd be hard-pressed to find a restaurant, café or fish and chip shop Down Under that doesn't have it on the menu. This white fish can be fried, grilled, barbecued, baked, chargrilled or steamed, and it tastes fabulous served with a lemon and dill butter. 77. Pastel de choclo, Chile Ildi Papp/Shutterstock A kind of Chilean shepherd’s pie, pastel de choclo – literally 'corn pie' – is a popular comfort food combining influences from both native Chileans (corn) and Spanish conquistadors (ground beef). The base of beef, onions, olives and hard-boiled eggs gets a sweet kick from the addition of raisins, in a way that’s typical of South American cooking. 76. Mole, Mexico Marcos Castillo/Shutterstock Mole, pronounced ‘moh-lay’, is a rich and complex sauce that’s an integral part of Mexican cuisine. It has a deep cultural significance and is often served during special occasions and celebrations. Mole is characterised by its thick consistency and the intricate blend of ingredients used to make it, including various chillies, spices, nuts, seeds, fruits and (sometimes) chocolate. There are many different regional varieties, including dark and spicy mole Poblano and mole Negro, which is particularly rich and smoky. The sauce is fabulous with all kinds of meat and poultry, as well as in enchiladas, burritos and tacos. 75. Borscht, Ukraine Tatiana Volgutova/Alamy Stock Photo Typically made with beetroot, cabbage, carrots, onions and potatoes, borscht – or beetroot soup – is a warming, hearty Ukrainian dish that's popular throughout Eastern Europe. Simmered slowly, this deep-red delight is packed with flavour. In restaurants, it usually comes served with a tablespoon of sour cream, with small garlic bread buns called pampushky on the side. 74. Plov, Uzbekistan Zu Kamilov/Shutterstock A meaty rice dish, plov comes in more than 60 varieties and is one of Uzbek cuisine's most beloved staples. These days, it's usually made by layering up a base of eggs, flour, butter and yogurt with steamed long grain rice, then adding toppings like meat, dried fruit, fresh herbs, fish, vegetables and spices. However, in its most basic form, plov is simply rice with onions, carrots and a meat like mutton or lamb – and its history can be traced back more than 1,000 years. 73. Bunny chow, South Africa Thao Lan/Shutterstock Despite the name, this popular South African food has nothing to do with rabbits! Bunny chow is, in fact, a dish consisting of a hollowed-out bread roll or loaf filled with either meat or vegetable curry, sometimes with added chickpeas or potatoes. It originated in Durban's Indian community in the 1940s, and is now a well-loved street food across the country. 72. Chicken rice, Singapore Be Saowaluck/Shutterstock Singapore’s wildly popular national dish is a riff on traditional Hainanese chicken rice from southern China, but has developed its own unique flavour profile and presentation. An ubiquitous sight in hawker centres across Singapore, this simple but sublime comfort food consists of chicken poached at a low temperature to ensure it remains tender and juicy. It’s served with fragrant rice cooked in chicken broth and aromatics, and is typically accompanied with a trio of condiments: chilli sauce, ginger paste and dark soy sauce. 71. Adobo, Philippines AS Foodstudio/Shutterstock One of the defining characteristics of adobo – a marinated meat dish that’s utterly adored across Filipino society – is its versatility. While the base ingredients of vinegar, soy sauce, garlic and spices remain constant, there are countless variations throughout the country, with each region (and individual family) putting its own twist on the dish. Adobo is traditionally made with chicken, pork or beef, but some variations also include coconut milk, potatoes, hard-boiled eggs or seafood. 70. Falafel, Middle East Anna Shepulova/Shutterstock These deep-fried balls of ground chickpeas, herbs, spices and onions make for a tasty vegetarian treat, whether served in a pitta wrap or with a tahini dip. Falafel dates back to ancient times and is likely to have originated from Egypt, where it's believed that a fava bean version was eaten as a substitute for meat by Coptic Christians during Lent. The dish later migrated towards the Levant, where chickpeas became the standard ingredient. 69. Hoppers, Sri Lanka bonchan/Shutterstock These thin and crispy pancakes are one of the world’s tastiest breakfast dishes, popular all over Sri Lanka and beyond. Hoppers are named for the pan that gives them their form, and consist of a paper-thin, crêpe-like bowl made from rice batter and coconut milk. While there are several styles, including sweet varieties, they’re most commonly made with an egg delicately cradled inside the batter, served with tasty toppings such as spicy chutney, zesty sambals or creamy dahl. 68. Nasi lemak, Malaysia dolphfyn/Shutterstock The unofficial national dish of Malaysia, nasi lemak can be found everywhere in the country, from upscale restaurants to street food sellers. It consists of rice cooked in coconut milk until fluffy and creamy, often with aromatics such as pandan leaves, bay leaves, lemongrass, ginger and garlic. On the side, you’ll find all kinds of savoury, salty and spicy accompaniments, from crispy fried anchovies and fiery sambal to roasted peanuts and deep-fried fish or chicken wings. 67. Pupusa, El Salvador Banana Productions/Shutterstock El Salvador’s national dish is so wildly popular, it has its own day of celebration. Pupusa is a thick griddle cake or flatbread that’s traditionally made with cornmeal or rice flour and stuffed with all kinds of delicious ingredients, from cheese to refried beans and chicharrón (fried pork belly). Crispy on the outside and soft and doughy on the inside, it's utterly moreish and readily available from street stalls, carts and restaurants all over El Salvador. You’ll usually find them served with curtido (a pickled cabbage slaw) and salsa to cut through the richness. 66. Beef rendang, Indonesia Paul_Brighton/Shutterstock This tasty West Sumatran curry gets bags of flavour from its long cooking process, which involves adding beef to a spicy paste of garlic, onion, red chillies, turmeric, ginger, pepper, lemongrass, galangal, star anise, kaffir lime leaves, bay leaves and turmeric leaves. It's then mixed with coconut milk and cooked until the meat is tender and the liquid caramelises around it. 65. French onion soup, France photosimysia/Shutterstock Very few dishes are as comforting as French onion soup – a blend of mellow, slowly cooked, caramelised onions in a broth laced with white wine and cognac. It's thought that a version of the soup has existed since Roman times (or even before that), but the modern version originated in 18th-century Paris. The soup is traditionally served in a ramekin, topped with a slice of baguette and covered with cheese, which is then melted to perfection under a grill. 64. Colcannon, Ireland Vm2002/Shutterstock Historically, this simple dish of potatoes and kale (or cabbage) mashed with milk, butter, salt and pepper, was eaten in Ireland year-round and served with boiled ham. So beloved is colcannon, there are even songs about it. It's also the official Irish Halloween dish. On 31 October, trinkets such as rings and thimbles – said to represent the fate of the person whose plate they end up on – are traditionally hidden in the mashed potatoes. 63. Bobotie, South Africa Bonchan/Shutterstock Curried meat and fruit with a creamy, egg-based golden topping, bobotie (pronounced 'ba-boor-tea') is South Africa’s national dish. It's been around for centuries, and has a mixed cultural heritage – much like the country itself. Think of it as somewhere between a potato-topped pie and moussaka, and you’ll be on the right track. 62. Haggis, Scotland Stockcreations/Shutterstock Immortalised as the 'Great chieftain o the puddin’-race' in a poem by Robert Burns, haggis – a savoury meat pudding of sheep offal, suet, oatmeal, onions and spices, simmered in a casing that's traditionally a sheep's stomach – is synonymous with Scotland. Eaten to celebrate Burns Night in January, haggis is traditionally served with neeps and tatties (turnips and mashed potatoes). The perfect fare to fend off winter chills! 61. Wiener schnitzel, Austria Brent Hofacker/Shutterstock Made by pounding, salting and rolling a veal cutlet in a crust of flour, eggs and breadcrumbs, then pan-frying it to perfection, wiener schnitzel is a Viennese speciality that's usually served with a side of boiled potatoes. The key is to shallow fry it in clarified butter or lard, so it goes a lovely golden yellow all