MAGNIFYING GLASS FOOD DRINKS TRAVEL ABOUT LATEST This article contains affiliate links. We may receive compensation if you make a purchase at no additional cost to you. Home » Food Favorites » 25 Best Donuts In The World 25 Best Donuts In The World By Daryl and Mindi Hirsch 93 SHARES Pinterest Facebook Reddit Flipboard We’ve eaten a lot of fried dough in our quest to find the best donuts in the world. This quest has taken us to four continents and even more countries. Which donut will be your favorite? Table of Contents Image: ©2foodtrippers We love donuts. We love cake donuts and yeast donuts. We love donuts filled with sweet cream and donuts topped with maple bacon. We love ring-shaped donuts with holes in the middle and ring-free donuts filled with sweet jam. Our love is boundless whether we we dunk donuts into coffee or eat them with fried chicken. This love isn’t limited to the US. Donuts around the world are great too. And it’s far from a fresh phenomenon. Human beings have been frying sugary dough for millennia – way before the holy, puffy, caky pastry became an American icon. Global donuts may have different names and come in various shapes and sizes but they have one one thing in common with their American cousins. They’re all delicious. Donut vs. Doughnut The only difference between a donut and a doughnut is the spelling of the two words. Many believe that the word was originally spelled in “gh” form, with the shorter word emerging from the popularity of Dunkin’ Donuts and Mister Donut in the mid 20th century. Trending Videos Paris Food Favorites Discover the best food in Paris. We may a side trip to eat this rainbow of donuts at Sidecar Doughnuts in Los Angeles. | Image: ©2foodtrippers Our donut love is nothing new. We started eating donuts at Dunkin Donuts in Philadelphia and Krispy Kreme in Atlanta when we were kids. We took this love on a 10-week American road trip during which we ate dozens of donuts. We ate so many donuts that we initiated a donut ban at the end of that trip. Needless to say, the ban was temporary because, as you may have noticed, we love donuts. Discover our picks for the best American donuts. Our Favorite Donuts In The World These Portuguese Malasadas satisfied our donut craving in Lisbon. | Image: ©2foodtrippers Our donut love affair didn’t end when we left America in 2016. Without any set plan, we’ve eaten donuts in four continents and a list of countries that includes Canada, England, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Mexico, Portugal, Scotland, South Africa, Spain and Vietnam. Without doubt, this list will grow as our travels continue. This Matcha donut was no match for our donut obsession when we ate it at Glory Holes in Toronto. | Image: ©2foodtrippers While there’s no debate that donuts are delicious, the competition between cake and yeast donuts is a fierce one. Some donut fans (like Daryl) prefer cake donuts leavened with either baking powder or baking soda while others (like Mindi) are on team yeast. As we share our favorite donuts in the world, it only makes sense to start with the basics – cake and yeast. Cake Donut (Various Countries) We started our day with these small but tasty cake donuts at Doughnut Vault in Chicago. | Image: ©2foodtrippers There’s not one type of cake donut. Some cake donuts are simple while others are topped with frosting, sprinkles and even bacon. The cake donut’s batter can be a blank slate with spices like cardamom or fruits flavors from apple cider added to the mix. However, the best cake donuts have some things in common. Dense and buttery, they’re simultaneously soft on the inside and firm on the edges. And, unlike yeast donuts, they’re super dunkable with coffee. Yeast Donut (Various Countries) We loved eating this salted caramel and honeycomb yeast donut at Bread Ahead in London. | Image: ©2foodtrippers Yeast donuts may not have the dunkability of cake donuts but they have other merits. This should be no surprise to anybody who adores Krispy Kreme, America’s king of yeast donuts. Spanning the centuries and fried in various configurations, yeast donuts get a good rise from yeast – hence their nickname of raised donuts. Whether they’re filled with jelly or glazed with sugar, yeast donuts are ridiculously easy to eat. Just don’t try to dunk them. Berliner (Germany) Keeping to theme, we ate this Berliner at Ludwig Stocker Hofpfisterei in its namesake city of Berlin. | Image: ©2foodtrippers While JFK wasn’t claiming to be a donut when he famously stated “Ich bin ein Berliner,” we can understand any potential confusion on the matter. After all, Germany’s iconic donuts are called Berliner Donuts outside of their home country. Similar to jelly donuts eaten around the world, Berliners are yeasty pastries filled with jam, fried in oil and sprinkled with powdered sugar. They’re work well for breakfast with coffee or as an afternoon snack. Discover more great desserts in Germany. Loukoumades (Greece) We felt lucky when we ate these Loukoumades coated with honey syrup at Krinos in Athens. | Image: ©2foodtrippers If you think that donuts are a modern invention, think again. Greece’s Loukoumades date back to the first Olympics in 776 BC. Though the original Loukoumades were enjoyed by ancient athletes, everybody can enjoy them today regardless of athletic ability or lack thereof. Traditional Greek Loukoumades are round balls of golden fried dough flavored with cinnamon and honey syrup. Some people sprinkle powdered sugar on their Loukoumades for an extra burst of sweetness but this is an optional add-on. We first ate Loukoumades during an Athens food tour that introduced us to many of the city’s best food vendors. We couldn’t get the memory of these Greek donuts, made with orange blossom honey, out of our heads. We returned to popular local bakery Krivos to eat them again and they were as good as we remembered. Discover where to eat in Athens. Krapfen (Austria) We didn’t cut this Krapfen in Vienna. Instead, we bit into it with abandon. | Image: ©2foodtrippers Germany may have invented Krapfen (also known as Berliners) but Austrians made the German donut their own by stuffing the yeasty donut with apricot jam and the occasional cream filling. Bakeries sell them at bakeries all over the central European country throughout the year though they’re especially popular during Faschingsdienstag festivities each February. We ate our first Austrian Krapfen in Graz and ate another in Vienna. Both were filled with apricot jam. Next time, we’ll try one filled with cream. Beignets (France And USA) We didn’t miss the powdered sugar when we ate these anise-topped Beignets at Lazare in Paris. | Image: ©2foodtrippers Beignets may hail from France but, as Americans, we associate them with Louisiana where Beignets are the state’s official donut. It’s not a competition since France and Louisiana have a connection and shared love for great food. This connection started when Acadians and other French settlers move in Louisiana in the 18th century. They didn’t just speak their native tongue when they arrived – they also brought a food culture and a passion for frying dough. Powdered sugar is the Beignet topping of choice in Louisiana cities like Baton Rouge where we ate these Beignet beauties. | Image: ©2foodtrippers Now that we’ve eaten Beignets in multiple Louisiana cities as well as in France, we can’t decide which version is superior. Yes, we’re equal opportunity Beignet eaters who like France’s version as much as we like the Louisiana version smothered with powdered sugar. However, there’s something undeniably special about eating Beignets at Cafe du Monde, the New Orleans institution that’s been frying dough since 1862. But it’s also pretty cool to eat them in Paris too. Discover where to eat in Paris unless you’d rather discover where to eat in New Orleans. Cronut (USA) Our Cronut was so special that it came with instructions when we ate it at Dominique Ansel Bakery in New York. | Image: ©2foodtrippers The Cronut became an instant pastry classic when it debuted at Dominique Ansel’s Soho Bakery in 2013 and hasn’t lost its luster yet. After training as a pastry chef in Paris, Ansel gained fame working for Daniel Boulud before inventing the croissant-donut hybrid at his now iconic New York City patisserie. We have no regrets about joining the daily queue for the chance to sample Ansel’s famous layered pastry infused with cream. Though we’ve eaten tasty copycats in cities like Barcelona, Cape Town and Nashville, there’s nothing like eating a Cronut at the pastry’s ground zero. Scoring one is the equivalent of winning the donut lottery. Discover more great food in New York City and our picks for the best NYC restaurants. Doughssant (South Africa) Would a ‘cronut’ by any other name taste so good? The answer is yes if it’s a ‘Doussant’ at Jason Bakery in Cape Town. | Image: ©2foodtrippers Subscribe to 2foodtrippers and get our FREE guide to eating like a local when you travel. You'll also get our emails so that you don't miss a delicious bite. SUBSCRIBE I consent to receiving emails and personalized ads. Don’t despair if you can’t get to New York City to try a Cronut – copycats abound around the world. The donut-croissant hybrid has even jumped the pond all the way to South Africa. However, to be clear, the South African version is called a Doussant. We taste-tested a Doussant topped with pistachio and raspberry on a Saturday morning in Cape Town. It was big enough to share and sweet enough to make us smile between bites. We may have enjoyed this carbon copy as much as we enjoyed the NYC original but that’s debatable. Discover where to eat in Cape Town. Fudge Doughnuts (Scotland) We loved eating a Fudge Doughnuts at Fisher and Donaldson in Fife. To be clear, we didn’t eat the entire tray. | Image: ©2foodtrippers Fudge Doughnuts, with their light brown frosting and sweet cream filling, are a fun Scottish treat. However, we weren’t sure if that frosting was chocolate or caramel. Daryl was certain that it was chocolate while Mindi was equally certain that it was caramel. We agreed on one thing. These donuts weren’t just delicious. They were also a dining highlight of our time in St. Andrews. Discover where to eat in St. Andrews as well as the rest of Fife. Holiday Theme Donuts (Various Countries) Eating green Krispy Kreme donuts shaped like monsters is one of the many unique things we did in Osaka. | Image: ©2foodtrippers Donut decor is no longer limited to simple frosting. This phenomenon is especially true during the holiday season in Asian countries where more is often more. Although we have yet to experience Christmas donuts in Asia, we were happy to find and eat kitschy, funky Halloween-themed donuts in Osaka. We literally ate our donut purchase on the sidewalk in a few happy bites. The quirky green ring tasted like home but looked like Japan – a major donut win. Discover where to eat in Osaka. Sufganiyah (Israel) These Sufganiyot from Federal Donuts in Philadelphia got our Hanukkah party started. | Image: ©2foodtrippers Rivaling Potato Latkes as Israel’s Hanukkah fried treat of choice, Sufganiyot weren’t invented in Israel. These seasonal donuts made their way to the Holy Land via Poland where donuts are called Pączki. Usually filled with fruit jam and occasionally stuffed with cream, Sufganiyot don’t just shine bright during the annual Festival of Lights in Israel. American Jews have incorporated Sufganiyot into their holiday traditions too. Shops like Philadelphia’s Federal Donuts sell boxes of Sufganiyot every December. Discover more great food in Philadelphia. Bombolone (Italy) Our taste buds went kaboom when we ate this tasty Bombolone at Ditta Artigianale in Florence. | Image: ©2foodtrippers Popular at Italian cafes, Bomboloni are Italy’s version of Germany’s Berliner. They’re especially popular in Tuscany where they’re filled with cream or jam and are often found in the same case as Cornettos, Italy’s version of France’s Croissant. We weren’t surprised to enjoy a terrific Bombolone in Florence. After all, it’s almost impossible to find a bad Bombolone in Italy. The entire country is a fantasy land for travelers with