SquareMeal SIGN IN JOIN REWARDS RESTAURANTS, BARS & PUBS PRIVATE & GROUP DINING EVENT & PARTY VENUES WEDDING VENUES CHRISTMAS PARTIES CONCIERGE RECIPES CHEFS Home Restaurants News It’s official, the best pizza in the world is in London It’s official, the best pizza in the world is in London Eight of the best pizzerias in the world found in the UK with London old-timer taking top spot Updated on 21 September 2020 • Written By Rosie Conroy Join SquareMeal Rewards Collect points, worth at least £1, every time you book online and dine at a participating restaurant. START COLLECTING POINTS Already a member? Sign in It’s official, the best pizza in the world can be found in London. The award comes by way of the well-renowned 50 Top Pizza guide which is announced each year to honour the people across Europe who are doing some seriously good things with dough. While the awards discount Italian pizzerias (because frankly, they’d wipe the floor with anyone), they do take into account reams of other European hotspots, which the organisers class as ‘old Continent’ countries. Across these countries the judges weigh up the merits of various restaurants to come up with their ultimate list of the top 50 places. This year the awards were steamed live – rather than presented in person – to a crowd of over 75000 pizza fans. YOU MIGHT ALSO LIKE The best pizza restaurants in London Our review of Gloria, the cult spot in Shoreditch Birmingham's best Italian restaurants For the second year in a row the top spot went to our very own capital city, with the UK racking up the accolade of also having the most pizzerias to feature on the list. The winner - 50 Kalò di Ciro Salvo Pizzeria - also scooped other honours at the prize giving, including the prize for best service and the best pizza chef for the owner himself. This hidden gem restaurant is no stranger to awards, having been featured on the Michelin guide as well as being voted one of the best pizzas by The New York Times in the past. The owner – Ciro Salvo – is the third generation in a line of master pizza makers who hail from Napoli and value the slow food movement credentials. The secret to the restaurants success is found in the dough recipe, which uses an unusually large percentage of water to fully hydrate the wheat, resulting in a light easily digestible base and crust. Serves on the winning menu are fairly simple, with the utmost attention to detail being given to carefully selected ingredients. There are classics like the infamous Margheritas and Marinaras, as well as some more unusual combinations in creations like the Nerano pizza which is topped with creamed courgettes, fior di latte cheese, diced courgettes, shaved cheese, extra virgin olive oil and fresh mint. Elsewhere London’s pizza joints of L'Antica Pizzeria, Oi Vita Pizzeria, 'O Ver St. James’s, Vicoli di Napoli and Sodo Pizza also featured on the list. The best pizza in the world: UK hotspots Here’s the full list of UK winners from 50 Top Pizza guide. 1. 50 Kalò di Ciro Salvo Pizzeria London, London - England 13. L'Antica Pizzeria, London - England 18. Oi Vita Pizzeria, London - England 23. 'O Ver St. James’s, London - England 25. Vicoli di Napoli, London - England 33. Double Zero Neapolitan Pizza, Manchester - England 35. Sodo Pizza, London - England 37. Paesano Pizza, Glasgow - Scotland Other winners on the list included places in Vienna, Amsterdam, Copenhagen and Brussels, while France took a big piece of the pie themselves, hosting five of the best pizza places in the world in its capital city of Paris. Aside from London’s eateries, two other British pizzerias were lauded, where winners included Double Zero Neapolitan Pizza in Manchester and Paesano Pizza in Glasgow. If you love fast food you might like our guide to the best fried chicken in London. Related articles A giant kitchen cube is coming to west London Pub in the Park 2024: Everything you need to know about the foodie festival Masterchef star Dean Banks cuts food bills and bans Rishi Sunak and Jeremy Hunt from his restaurants Foodies Festivals is the UK's largest celebration of food, drink and music Searcys Bubbly Show 2024: Everything you need to know about this sparkling wine extravaganza Related articles NEWS A giant kitchen cube is coming to west London NEWS Pub in the Park 2024: Everything you need to know about the foodie festival NEWS Masterchef star Dean Banks cuts food bills and bans Rishi Sunak and Jeremy Hunt from his restaurants NEWS Foodies Festivals is the UK's largest celebration of food, drink and music NEWS Hairy Bikers star Dave Myers dies at 66 after a battle with cancer NEWS Salt Bae's London restaurant, known for its almost £700 steaks, turns off heating to cut costs NEWS Which restaurants won and lost Michelin stars in 2024? The results are in NEWS ‘Absolute dread’: Chefs and restaurateurs call on government to reduce VAT to 10% MORE RESTAURANTS NEWS Be in the know Get the latest news, updates and offers from SquareMeal to your inbox SIGN UP TO EMAILS Restaurants and Bars: Restaurant gift vouchers | Browse restaurants by postcode | Find restaurants near me | Suggest a restaurant About SquareMeal Contact Us We're hiring Terms Privacy © Monomax Ltd 2024. All Rights Reserved.SquareMeal is a trading name of Monomax Ltd. v3.2.3 Ireland | Singapore | Hong Kong | UAE