Canstar & Money Magazine's Insurer of the Year Contact Us Make a Claim Retrieve a Quote Login Car Insurance Home Insurance Travel Insurance Pet Insurance SPECIAL OFFER Motorcycle Insurance Life Insurance Roadside Assistance Existing Customers Motorcycle Insurance Guides Motorcycle vs car: 8 reasons to ditch your car for a motorcycle Motorcycle vs car: 8 reasons to ditch your car for a motorcycle Related articles Buying your first motorcycle: 5 things you should know How to Get a Motorbike Licence in Australia How to Get a Motorbike Licence in NSW How to Get a Motorbike Licence in Victoria How to Get a Motorbike Licence in WA How to Get a Motorbike Licence in Tasmania How to Get a Motorbike Licence in the ACT How to Get a Motorbike Licence in SA How to Get a Motorbike Licence in NT How to Get a Motorbike Licence in Qld 8 of the best motorcycle rides in Australia 5 motorcycle safety gear must haves How to choose a motorcycle helmet that's right for you Pros and cons of different types of motorcycles The cost of owning a motorcycle Mastering your motorcycle ergonomics The beginner’s guide to purchasing a motorcycle jacket How to prevent motorcycle theft Motorcycle lane filtering rules explained Motorcycle road positioning explained 6 Motorcycle maintenance tasks you can do yourself (inc. checklist) How to save on Motorcycle Insurance Motorcycle Sales Survey & Statistics 2022 Do you need a licence for a scooter? Disclaimer: This information is general in nature only. While Budget Direct has endeavoured to ensure the information we’ve relied on is accurate and current, we do not guarantee it. Budget Direct accepts no liability for this information. Motorcycle vs car. It’s a debate as old as time. Or, at least, as old as the automotive industry. Still, the debate rages on. Do you prefer the spaciousness of a car, or the fresh air and freedom of a motorcycle? Other questions include ones around fuel efficiency, resale value, parking, and traffic jams. With so many things to consider, many people choose a car by default. However, as many riders know, motorcycles can be mighty rewarding. No matter what you look for in a vehicle, there are plenty of worthwhile reasons to swap your car for motorcycle. In fact, we’ve compiled eight compelling reasons to ditch your car for a motorcycle, at least some of which are sure to persuade even the staunchest car enthusiast. See all of Budget Direct’s motorcycle insurance guides #1 Beat traffic The average Australian driver spends about 100–150 hours in traffic every year [1]. That’s almost an entire week wasted in traffic. Surely we all have better things to do than slowly inch forward in bumper-to-bumper traffic. Well, motorcycles appear to be the solution. An Australian study found that, during peak hours, a 30km trip in metropolitan Melbourne is roughly three times faster by motorcycle than by car. Similarly, a Belgian study estimated that having just 10% more motorcycles on the road could reduce average travel times by roughly 8 minutes for all commuters [2]. If you’re sick of daily traffic jams, then it might be time to ‘upgrade’ to a motorcycle. #2 Parking Because motorcycles are smaller than cars, they can fit into tighter spaces, which can make finding a parking spot easier. Not only can motorcyclists save time circling the block looking for a park, they generally pay less for parking than car owners. #3 Use less fuel Research shows the average Australian driver spends $71.50 on fuel per week, or $3,781 per year. Motorcycles are more fuel-efficient than cars. Many consume less than four litres of fuel per 100km — outperforming even the most fuel-efficient hybrid cars [3]. This can save a motorcyclist literally thousands of dollars a year in fuel costs. #4 Fresh air and freedom Imagine this: sunshine, a cool breeze, an open road, and the scent of leather and the great outdoors. Few things beat the fresh air and freedom you experience when riding a motorcycle. It can be equal parts exhilarating and liberating. Studies have shown that riding a motorcycle can both reduce stress and promote relaxation. A recent study found that riding a motorcycle had "a positive effect on stress levels, decreasing hormonal biomarkers by 28 percent compared to the other measured activities" [4]. Sounds like the ideal excuse to hit the road! #5 Fun Motorcycles are fun. You’re roaring down the road, adrenaline pumping, off on an adventure. In contrast, many cars are simply a way for their owners to get from point A to point B. If you’re keen for some fun, fresh air and freedom, check out 8 of the best motorcycle rides in Australia. #6 Health benefits Not only are motorcycles a whole lot of fun, they’re also good for your health. A 70kg motorcycle rider will burn an average of 170 calories during a one-hour ride — roughly 40 calories more than the same person would burn by driving a car for one hour [5]. Plus, riding a motorcycle engages far more muscle groups than driving, giving you a full body workout. While this admittedly isn’t enough to forego your regular exercise routine, it’s certainly a nice bonus! #7 Resale value Research shows that just one month after purchasing a new car, it will have already lost 10% of its resale value. After one year, this depreciation will climb to 20%. Usually, this figure continues to increase by about 10% per year, meaning five years later the average new car will have lost roughly 60% of its initial value [6]. This rapid depreciation can really hurt your wallet come resale time. New motorcycles generally depreciate slower than new cars, which means you can get proportionately more of your money back if you sell your bike. #8 Keeping clean When was the last time you cleaned your car (driving in the rain doesn’t count)? If it’s been longer than you’d like to admit, don’t worry, you’re not alone. The good news is that motorcycles are significantly easier to clean than cars, for the simple reason there’s less to clean. This is particularly true for people who ride their motorcycle mainly on sealed roads (as opposed to off road). Plus, you don’t have worry about decluttering the boot, tidying the glovebox, or trying to clean under seats. See all of Budget Direct's motorcycle insurance guides Sources [1] https://www.tomtom.com/traffic-index/sydney-traffic/ [2] https://blogs.crikey.com.au/theurbanist/2015/05/04/are-motorcycles-the-answer-to-urban-traffic-congestion/ [3] https://itstillruns.com/motorcycles-vs-cars-gas-mileage-7271218.html [4] https://www.autoevolution.com/news/riding-a-motorcycle-reduces-stress-study-shows-131707.html [5] https://www.bikerandbike.co.uk/motorcycling-burns-between-170-and-600-calories-per-hour/ [6] https://www.carfax.com/blog/car-depreciation Related articles Buying your first motorcycle: 5 things you should know How to Get a Motorbike Licence in Australia How to Get a Motorbike Licence in NSW How to Get a Motorbike Licence in Victoria How to Get a Motorbike Licence in WA How to Get a Motorbike Licence in Tasmania How to Get a Motorbike Licence in the ACT How to Get a Motorbike Licence in SA How to Get a Motorbike Licence in NT How to Get a Motorbike Licence in Qld 8 of the best motorcycle rides in Australia 5 motorcycle safety gear must haves How to choose a motorcycle helmet that's right for you Pros and cons of different types of motorcycles The cost of owning a motorcycle Mastering your motorcycle ergonomics The beginner’s guide to purchasing a motorcycle jacket How to prevent motorcycle theft Motorcycle lane filtering rules explained Motorcycle road positioning explained 6 Motorcycle maintenance tasks you can do yourself (inc. checklist) How to save on Motorcycle Insurance Motorcycle Sales Survey & Statistics 2022 Do you need a licence for a scooter? Car Insurance Comprehensive Car Insurance Third Party Car Insurance NSW CTP Green Slip Insurance Compare Car Insurance Assessment Centres Home Insurance Home & Contents Insurance Building Insurance Contents Insurance Compare Home Insurance Other Products Travel Insurance Motorcycle Insurance Life Insurance Pet Insurance Roadside Assistance Existing Customers Policy Manager Make a Claim Policy Wording Explained Rewards Customer Assistance Fuel Discounts Make a Complaint National Contracted Repairers About Us Read our Blog Awards Careers TV Ads Internationally Singapore South Africa Blog - Budget Direct Chasing Cars Facebook - Budget Direct Youtube - Budget Direct For general enquiries and feedback, Contact Us or Make a Complaint Insurance is arranged by Auto & General Services Pty Ltd (ABN 61 003 617 909, AFSL 241 411, Registered Office: 13/9 Sherwood Rd, Toowong 4066) on behalf of the insurer, Auto & General Insurance Company Limited ABN 42 111 5 86 353. Because we don’t know your financial needs, we can’t advise if this insurance will suit you. Please consider your needs, the Financial Services Guide, the Product Disclosure Statement, and the Target Market Determination when deciding to buy insurance. Subject to meeting underwriting criteria. Any discounts on both new and renewing policies only apply to the extent that any minimum premium isn't reached. ^Online Discounts Terms & Conditions Discounts apply to the premium paid for a new Budget Direct Home & Contents, Home only, Contents only, Comprehensive, Third Party Property Only or Third Party Property, Fire & Theft Car Insurance policy, initiated online on or after 29 March 2017, and for a new Budget Direct Comprehensive, Third Party Property, Fire & Theft & Third Party Property only Motorcycle Insurance policy, initiated online on or after 4 June 2020 and for a new Pet Insurance policy, initiated online on or after 18 February 2021. This online discount does not apply to Roadside Assistance that is added to a Budget Direct Car Insurance policy. The new policy discount amount varies by product: 30% discount on combined Home & Contents Insurance (consisting of 15% discount for combining Home & Contents covers and 15% discount for policies initiated online),15% for Home only or Contents only policies, 15% discount on Comprehensive, Third Party Property Only and Third Party Property, Fire & Theft Car or Motorcycle Insurance and 15% discount on Pet Insurance. A 15% discount applies to the premium paid for a new Budget Direct Travel Insurance policy initiated and purchased online on or after 22 February 2023. Discounts do not apply to any renewal offer of insurance. Discounts only apply to the insurance portion of the premium. Discounts are applied before government charges, taxes, levies and fees, including instalment processing fees (as applicable). The full extent of discounts may therefore be impacted. We reserve the right to change the offer without notice. ©2024 Budget Direct. All rights reserved. Report Insurance Fraud Website Terms of Use Staying Safe Online Privacy Policy Live chat Chat with us