Independent, impartial advice for car buyers and car owners Main menu Expert Advice Expert Ratings Car brands Cars for sale Sell your car Value your car Search Trending now: The best websites for selling your car Find an Expert Rating: Car brand Abarth Alfa Romeo Alpine Aston Martin Audi Bentley BMW Citroën Cupra Dacia DS Automobiles Ferrari Fiat Ford Genesis Honda Hyundai Infiniti Jaguar Jeep Kia Lamborghini Land Rover Lexus Lotus Maserati Mazda McLaren Mercedes-Benz MG Mini Mitsubishi Morgan Nissan Peugeot Polestar Porsche Renault Rolls-Royce SEAT Škoda Smart SsangYong Subaru Suzuki Tesla Toyota Vauxhall Volkswagen Volvo Model Who makes the most reliable engines? Warranty data show that some famous-name car brands make some of the least reliable engines on the market Stuart Masson 24 March 2014 Car warranty advice at The Car Expert, brought to you by Brought to you by “If only everything in life was as reliable as Volkswagen” posited the famous 1987 advert for the Volkswagen Golf. Similarly, Audi declares: “Vorsprung durch Technik.” Loosely translated, this means “advancement through technology” and both of these slogans are designed to instil a feeling of confidence in each company’s engineering prowess. Unfortunately, however, the truth can be very different. Figures recently released by consumer warranty company Warranty Direct, show that Volkswagen, Audi and BMW make some of the least reliable engines on the market. Audi came second-from-bottom in the engine reliability charts with one failure in every 27, beaten only by the now-defunct MG Rover. It’s a poor showing for BMW’s Mini brand, too, coming in at third-from-bottom with one failure in every 40, while BMW themselves take up the seventh slot in between Peugeot and Renault with one in 45. Volkswagen makes its appearance in the ninth-from-bottom position, with one in every 52 owners suffering an engine fault of some kind. An Audi R8 with a minor overheating issue. So who makes the most reliable engines? Perhaps not surprisingly, it’s the Japanese, with the top spot taken by Honda. Only one in every 344 Honda owners have had engine trouble, with second-placed rival Toyota notching up just one in 171. It’s not all doom and gloom for the European marques, though, with Mercedes-Benz taking third, followed closely by Volvo. The Brits have something to be cheerful about, with Jaguar placed fifth and Land Rover in tenth – although in the interests of yin and yang we should note that JLR’s repair costs were considered very high, with one Range Rover Sport owner quoted nearly £15,000 to repair an engine failure. The biggest surprise, however, comes in the form of seventh-placed Fiat who recorded a creditable one failure in 85, beating both Ford and Nissan. Remember that next time an Audi salesman tries to convince you to sign on the dotted line… Top 10 manufacturers – most reliable engines Manufacturer Failure Rate 1 Honda 1 in 344 2 Toyota 1 in 171 3 Mercedes-Benz 1 in 119 4 Volvo 1 in 111 5 Jaguar 1 in 103 6 Lexus 1 in 101 7 Fiat 1 in 85 8 Ford 1 in 80 9 Nissan 1 in 76 10 Land Rover 1 in 72 Bottom 10 manufacturers – least reliable engines Manufacturer Failure Rate 1 MG Rover 1 in 13 2 Audi 1 in 27 3 MINI 1 in 40 4 Saab 1 in 40 5 Vauxhall 1 in 41 6 Peugeot 1 in 44 7 BMW 1 in 45 8 Renault 1 in 46 9 Volkswagen 1 in 52 10 Mitsubishi 1 in 59 You should also read: New car warranty – do I have to take the car back to the dealership? Independent garages vs. franchised dealerships – the pros and cons Here at The Car Expert, we have some fantastic warranty offers for our readers provided by our commercial partners. If you’re interested in a used car warranty, you should check these out: ALA Insurance provides used car warranties in conjunction with the RAC MotorEasy offers warranties and many other types of cover for car owners Warrantywise is a long-established and multi-award-winning warranty provider More car warranty information Previous Should my used car warranty be regulated? What’s the difference? Car warranty vs. car insurance Understanding your warranty policy Next 1 2 3 4 5 More car warranty news, information and advice at The Car Expert Share FacebookTwitterLinkedinWhatsAppReddIt Stuart Masson https://www.thecarexpert.co.uk/ Stuart is the Editorial Director of our suite of sites: The Car Expert, The Van Expert and The Truck Expert. Originally from Australia, Stuart has had a passion for cars and the automotive industry for over thirty years. He spent a decade in automotive retail, and now works tirelessly to help car buyers by providing independent and impartial advice. Exclusive partner offers for you: GAP insurance and warranty offers from ALA Sell your car today with Motorway Browse cars for sale from Motors Insurance and warranty offers from Motoreasy New car leasing offers from Carparison Check a car's history with carVertical Expert Advice Award-winning, independent and impartial advice on buying, owning and running a car Explore Expert Ratings We compare reviews from 30 motoring websites to bring you a definitive rating for every new car Explore Expert News All the most important new car launches, model updates, car reviews and industry news Explore Expert Partners Our commercial partners bring you exclusive offers on their products and services Explore Expert Advice Car buying Car finance Car ownership Car insurance Expert Ratings All Expert Ratings How our Expert Ratings work License our Expert Ratings Expert Info About us Media appearances Partners Advertising Expert Family The Van Expert The Truck Expert Immediate Network Expert Knowledge Would you like to stay up to date with all the latest advice, ratings, news and offers from The Car Expert? Yes please T&Cs | Privacy | Cookies © 2024 Immediate Network Ltd. All rights reserved Get all our latest Expert Advice, Expert Ratings and Expert News Our weekly newsletter, straight from The Car Expert to your inbox Yes please! ×