Manage Cookie Consent To provide the best experiences, we use technologies like cookies to store and/or access device information. Consenting to these technologies will allow us to process data such as browsing behavior or unique IDs on this site. Not consenting or withdrawing consent, may adversely affect certain features and functions. Accept Deny View preferences Cookie Policy 01923 866 002 Avsco.cbtdas@gmail.com Home Courses T&Cs Our partners Blog Contact TEN REASONS WHY RIDING A MOTORBIKE IS BETTER THAN DRIVING A CAR News RIDING A MOTORBIKE IS CHEAPER THAN DRIVING A CAR Motorcycles are cheaper to maintain and insure than cars, even if you’re riding a top-of-the-range sports bike. Similarly, motorbike tyres are significantly cheaper than car tyres, and it’s easier to find a garage that will do an MOT on a motorcycle. Cars are more expensive to buy and much more expensive to tax. Consider what you’d get for your money if you bought a car and a motorbike. When you look at it like this, it’s quite clear that riding a motorbike is better value for money. IT’S OFTEN EASIER TO FIND A PARKING SPACE! Parking, particularly in big towns and cities, can be an absolute nightmare, and you often pay through the nose for the privilege. When you’re riding a motorbike into town, you are much more likely to find a parking space, and you may not even have to pay as much to park there! YOUR MENTAL AND PHYSICAL HEALTH WILL BENEFIT Two huge benefits of riding a motorbike are the improvements to your mental and physical health. Riding a motorbike will improve your core strength, your knee and neck strength and your coordination whilst also helping you to de-stress and let go of your worries. RIDING A MOTORBIKE IS PERFECT FOR COMMUTING TO WORK Commuting is something many of us still have to do – even after the pandemic. If you are someone who has to commute to the city multiple days a week, you will know all about the traffic, congestion charges and spending more time in your car than at home or in your office! Commuting is a lot easier when you are on a bike. You can filter through traffic and get to your destination much faster. RIDING A MOTORBIKE HAS LESS OF AN IMPACT ON THE ENVIRONMENT Riding a motorbike uses fewer fossil fuels and emits much less pollution than cars and other modes of public transport. Riding a bike also causes less damage to roads and motorways, meaning maintenance teams don’t have as many roads or potholes to fix! YOU WON’T GET CAUGHT IN AS MUCH TRAFFIC We are sure you will have sat in your car in traffic, only to see a motorbike come up the outside of your – easily navigating their way around the long line of cars and no doubt reaching their destination much more quickly! Well, when you are riding a motorbike, you are less likely to have to sit in a queue of traffic, waiting for someone to move forward! Simply weave your way (SAFELY!) in and out of the traffic and get home quicker. A MOTORBIKE IS EASIER AND QUICKER TO CLEAN As a motorbike is generally much smaller than a car, it’s much easier to clean – depending on how much time you take to make it look shiny and new! Whilst you may need to clean your motorbike more regularly to avoid dirt and rust build-up, we guarantee you will have more fun cleaning your motorbike than your car. RIDING A MOTORBIKE COULD MAKE YOU A BETTER DRIVER As a rider on the road, you need to be much more aware of your surroundings. This is because many road traffic accidents are caused by car drivers who are not paying attention to the motorbikes that are on the road. As a biker, your hazard perception and coordination are improved, making you a better driver! MOTORBIKES ARE MORE FUEL EFFICIENT THAN CARS Riding a motorbike will generally cost you much less than it would if you were driving a car. This is because the average fuel consumption rate for motorbikes is between 30-40km per litre, whereas, for cars, this is much lower. A motorbike is also lighter load, so it can go much further with a lot less fuel than its four-wheeled counterparts. BECOME PART OF THE MOTORBIKE COMMUNITY When you ride a motorbike, you become part of the biker’s community. People will want to chat with you, you look out for each other on the road, and during a nice sunny ride out, you are bound to see bikers everywhere. Riding a motorbike is just about getting from A to B quickly. It’s also about joining a sense of friendship and support with your local bikers’ events and get-togethers. THIS MAY ALSO INTEREST YOU: Bike Safety: How to secure your motorbike against theft Frequently Asked Questions | Direct Access Scheme | AVSCO 5 biggest mistakes people make during their motorbike test BOOK YOUR MOTORBIKE TEST WITH AVSCO TODAY AVSCO is one of the most reliable names in Watford motorbike training in the UK. If you are looking to ride a motorbike and need a CBT, theory test, or full licence, then make sure you sign up with a company you can trust. As a motorbike training company, we have a wealth of experience and a mission to get more young people on two wheels. We train thousands of riders a year, and we’ve been doing it for over forty years. We believe that two wheels are for life, and we want to help you get the best out of your motorcycle. RECENT POSTS Do you have questions about your upcoming CBT course? A motorbike riding 2022 year in review 3 reasons why you should learn to ride a motorbike in 2023 How to keep warm on your motorcycle this winter Ten reasons why riding a motorbike is better than driving a car Bike Safety: How to secure your motorbike against theft Frequently Asked Questions | Direct Access Scheme | AVSCO 5 biggest mistakes people make during their motorbike test A 2022 guide to choosing the right motorbike insurance Challenges Motorcyclists face on a daily basis SELECT A PAGE Home Courses ITM (Introduction to motorcycling) CBT Gear Conversion Full Licence T&Cs Our partners Blog Contact READ OUR REVIEWS avsco.cbtdas@gmail.com CONTACT US VIA FACEBOOK | Privacy Policy | Cookie Policy | Conditions of Use