is now available Brands Tyres About Services FAQs Contact The Benefits of Commuting by Motorcycle vs Car Uncategorized AUTHOR Ari Kypuros• Owner & Founder of Tyreman M/C 10 mins • September 20, 2022 In this article Beating the traffic Motorcycle vs Car costs Easy to find a parking space Riding a motorcycle is great for your health Show more Share this article Twitter Facebook LinkedIn Copy to clipboard Are you considering a motorcycle as one of your primary modes of transport? When considering the advantages, motorcycle riders have some profound benefits that can tip the scales in the motorcycle vs car debate. Sure, cars are a little more spacious, but they do not come anywhere close to the freedom of a motorcycle. When travelling to and from work daily, fuel efficiency, parking, and avoiding traffic are all important factors to consider. We’ve compiled the main benefits of commuting on a motorcycle to help sway you to the two-wheeled side of the fence. Read on and decide for yourself! Beating the traffic Riding a motorcycle will usually make your trip a lot quicker compared to a car. Did you know that in all Australian states and territories, motorcycle and scooter riders are legally allowed to “lane filter” at low speeds through traffic? This can save you a lot of time on your morning commute by helping you to avoid large clumps of traffic. If you don’t know, lane filtering is when a motorcycle slowly travels through stopped or slow-moving traffic between two adjacent lines of traffic travelling in the same direction. This is great for all road users as it helps reduce traffic congestion and can also be safer for riders. Plus, it can save a lot of time on your trip. Who doesn’t want that? Although this can make your commute faster, be sure to be cautious when lane filtering as other traffic may not always see you. We have a helpful article to assist with safety tips for first time riders. Motorcycle vs Car costs In general, motorcycles are more cost-efficient when compared with owning a car. This is because they are cheaper to buy, maintain, repair, and insure. So, when we consider that a vehicle can be one of our most significant monthly expenses, we’ll take the savings where we can get them! The upfront cost of buying a new motorcycle is much lower than that of a new car, usually with a quality beginner friendly motorcycle often starting around $5000. That’s not even taking into account the price of second hand motorcycles. Another advantage of owning a motorcycle is that its resale value is usually much higher than that of a car. A motorcycle also beats every primary vehicle type other than an electric car for fuel economy. And finally, insurance can be much cheaper, depending on your driving record, to the tune of several hundred dollars each year compared with regular auto insurance. Easy to find a parking space Sometimes getting somewhere isn’t the hard part; finding a parking space is. When riding a Motorcycle, you’ll notice that your parking routine becomes much easier due to size and a greater chance of finding a park closer to your destination. In some cases, you can even find parking spaces specifically for Motorcycles. If you are considering purchasing a parking spot in the CBD for a motorcycle, which is much smaller, it may also have a lower price tag. Riding a motorcycle is great for your health While there are dangers associated with riding, and we need to stay vigilant on the road, for the most part, motorcycles are safe. You do need to be attentive and aware, but you are likely to enjoy the ride to your destination, which creates numerous health benefits, such as: Mental and emotional health: Riding improves your mood, makes you happy and boosts endorphins Increases energy levels: An increase in your happiness provides more energy and increases your life span Core strength and stability: You have to work your core to keep upright on a bike Maintaining the correct posture: This also keeps your body in shape and can improve muscle tone Neck strength: Riding can improve your neck strength, helping those with back or neck problems Riding takes effort and increases your insulin sensitivity, which helps your metabolism burn calories and store less fat. So there are health benefits all around! Easier and cheaper maintenance Motorcycle repairs are much easier (and cheaper) when compared with a car. The maintenance or repairs for a motorcycle are generally simpler than a car, making it easier for you to save money on mechanics and, if you are skilled, to potentially fix things yourself. One of the most important and overlooked aspect of your motorcycle maintenance are tyres. It can be dangerous to ride on worn motorcycle tyres as it is integral to balance and stability, but our skilled team at Tyreman M/C will be more than happy to help with any questions you have. We have some helpful tips about caring for motorcycle tyres that show how easy the process can be. You can also check out all of our services to understand the types of assistance available from the experts to ensure your bike is always in great shape. A more sustainable transport option It may only be a small improvement, but riding a motorcycle can be a more eco-friendly transport option than most for the following reasons: You will spend less time on the road, and therefore use less fuel. Motorcycles also use less fuel in general compared to cars, which is great for the environment as well as your pocket. Fewer cars on the road makes traffic flow better overall. Riding a motorcycle takes up less road and parking space, which will reduce time on the road for everyone. Although only marginally, motorcycles may emit fewer greenhouse gases than cars. While some of these changes may be slight, if you require transport every day, the savings do add up! Every little bit helps where sustainability is concerned. Riding a motorcycle is fun! While we have mentioned a lot of practical benefits to commuting on a motorcycle, let’s not forget one of the main reasons we choose to do it; it’s fun! Riding a motorcycle is more than just a way to get around; it is also a fun activity that, for many, turns transport into a hobby. Riding a motorcycle is an exciting activity that comes with a great community of other riders whom you can meet and be social with. A great way to express yourself is through a wide choice of motorcycle types and gear. There are plenty of options to suit all styles. The motorcycle community is also very welcoming and passionate. You are sure to dive into a variety of different topics with other enthusiasts who are always excited to talk about their passion, answer questions, and make recommendations. Things to keep in mind While we’ve painted a pretty nice picture here, it’s only fair that we mention some of the drawbacks of riding a bike. For Example: There is less storage capacity on a motorcycle than in a car. This can be an issue if you are grocery shopping or have a large amount of equipment to take on your trip, as you will have limited space to store items. Most of the time, you will only have the capacity to ride solo or with one other passenger. A motorcycle is generally not the best option if you have additional passengers on your trip. Trips can be less pleasant depending on specific weather conditions like rain, wind, storms, or dusty conditions. This is something to keep in mind, as it will not always be as safe to ride compared to other transportation options. A rider who is not diligent can put themselves and others in a more dangerous position on the road, so you will have to continually pay attention when riding, even more so than a car. This is pretty obvious, but if you don’t have a motorcycle licence, you will need one to ride. That being said, the same issue is apparent for cars as well. If these disadvantages do not affect you, we are confident that you will notice the difference commuting on a motorcycle makes. Choosing a motorcycle for your commute So there you have it; many pros and a few cons of commuting with a motorcycle vs car or any other option. Are you convinced? If you are still unsure, feel free to speak with the expert team at Tyreman MC. We live and breathe motorcycles and love to help people ensure they choose the right options, especially when it comes to tyres. Feel free to drop us a line, and let’s chat about motorcycles! About Ari Kypuros Owner & Founder of Tyreman M/C Ari is the owner and founder of Tyreman M/C. From riding dirt bikes at a young age and having over 10 years’ experience in the tyre industry, Ari lives and breathes motorcycles. Coming from 3 generations in the motorcycle tyre industry, he has a close connection to the automotive community in Melbourne. More articles Ari Kypuros TYREMAN MC Contact Ari 0434 414 345 sales@tyremanmc.com.au 102A Chifley Dr, Preston VIC 3072 Hours Mon to Fri: 8am – 5pm Sat: 8am – 2pm Sun: Closed Follow Ari ABOUT Articles FAQs Contact Shipping and Returns TYRES Cruiser Classic Harley Davidson Metric Touring Dual Sport Touring Trail Off Road Dot Compliant Intermediate / Hard Soft Scooter Classic Modern Sport Commuter Hypersport Touring BRANDS Continental Heidenau Metzeler Michelin Motoz Pirelli Shinko View all brands