Write Sign up Sign in Choosing between a motorbike and a car, which is best for you? Danny Oradeo · Follow 5 min read · Jul 26, 2019 3 It can be tough to decide between buying a car and buying a motorcycle. How do you know which one is the best choice for you? To start, you need to know exactly what the differences are between a car and motorbike. This includes learning about the benefits of a car, as well as motorcycle benefits. After learning about the various car and motorbike benefits, take the time to think about what you need and want. That way, you can choose a car or motorbike that is best suited to you and your travelling needs. Riding a motorbike vs driving a car Cars and motorcycle are both reliable forms of transportation, however, riding a motorbike gives you a sense of freedom and exhilaration that you might not get from a car. So it is not surprising many people are considering investing in a new bike, instead of a new car. Some people claim that riding a motorbike is actually easier than driving a car. Of course, this is down to personal preference, but take this time to think about which you prefer to ride/drive. A car can be driven in any conditions and in any weather, whereas motorcycles can’t. This makes cars more user friendly all year round. Usually, the car is to go-to vehicle on wet or icy days, so if you do not have a car, but you do have a bike, you might find that some days, it is difficult to get around. Generally speaking, motorbikes perform better than cars. They have a stronger acceleration and exceptional maneuverability and agility, which doesn’t just make for a more exciting ride, but it also helps riders to avoid some accidents that car drivers might not be able to avoid. Car vs Motorcycle benefits in a city In a busy city, it is often more advantageous to ride a bike than it is to drive a car, but why? Because: Motorcycles are easier to park. As they are smaller it is usually easier to find a parking space and/or squeeze into a small space you have found. Also, more businesses now are providing motorcycle specific parking spaces, making parking a motorbike even easier than parking a car. A Motorcycle can navigate busy city traffic with ease. It can weave in and out of traffic and unlike car drivers, motorcycle riders usually aren’t stuck in traffic for hours. Financial benefits of motorcycle riding over car driving Which is more cost-effective, a car or a motorbike? The quick answer….a motorcycle! Buying brand new: a brand new car is more expensive to buy than a brand new motorbike. Although car and bike prices do vary depending on the make and model you choose, in general, a motorcycle will be cheaper to buy. Buying second hand: just like buying brand new, you can usually buy a second hand motorbike for a fraction of the cost of a second hand car. Fuel efficiency: motorbikes generally are far more fuel efficient than a car. This means that a motorcycle uses less fuel than a car would and therefore, a motorbike is cheaper to run. Maintenance: maintaining a motorcycle is usually cheaper than maintaining a car. This is because the size and location of the engine is smaller and easier to get to on a bike. Value: motorcycles are great for maintaining their value, whereas cars depreciate quite quickly, this process is slower with a motorcycle. Added to this, bikes are usually easier to resell. Other Motorbike benefits vs car benefits When it comes to buying a car, you do have far more choice and selection than you do buying a bike, whether you buy brand new or second hand. This is simply because cars have been more popular for a longer period of time. However, having said this, that doesn’t mean there is no choice out there. In fact motorcyclists now have a fantastic selection of bikes in all shapes and sizes. Both bikes and cars allow you to carry at least one passenger, however, if you regularly give lifts to people, or you have a family with young children, a bike may not be as practical as a car. Being bigger in size, cars have one big advantage over motorbikes, they have fantastic storage. This is great for weekends away or days out, it helps you to transport shopping and goods and helps you to get the most out of your vehicle. However, this doesn’t mean that bikes have no storage and in fact, you can add storage to most bikes. There is a real sense of community among motorcycle riders, this is something you do not get with car drivers. As a result of this, you might find yourself going on rides with other motorcyclists and therefore, riding your bike is just as much of a hobby as it is a necessity. Riding a motorbike actually burns calories, driving a car doesn’t. To maintain your balance on a bike, to move through the turns and operate a motorcycle, you need to use your own energy. Therefore, riding a bike is actually good exercise and is better for your health. It is easy to customise your motorbike and riding attire to suit your personal preferences. Cars do not offer the same level of customisation, they don’t allow you to put your own personality into the car itself. Car vs Motorbike, which is best for you? You have now read most of the pros and cons to both bike riding and car driving. The next thing you need to do is think about what you need from your new bike or car. Your personal needs for your vehicle might make the decision for you. For example, if you are looking for a family vehicle, you will need a car, but if you’re looking to buy a second vehicle for your own pleasure, a bike is much more suited. Also think about how much you are willing to pay, both upfront for the vehicle and on-going costs, such as fuel, maintenance, tax and insurance. If you would like something cheaper, then a motorcycle is the obvious choice. Remember, whether a car or a bike is better for you depends on your circumstances, there is no right or wrong answer. Sign up to discover human stories that deepen your understanding of the world. Free Distraction-free reading. No ads. Organize your knowledge with lists and highlights. Tell your story. Find your audience. Sign up for free Membership Access the best member-only stories. Support independent authors. Listen to audio narrations. Read offline. Join the Partner Program and earn for your writing. Try for $5/month Motorcycle Car Motorbike 3 Written by Danny Oradeo 4 Followers I travel a lot, like sport, motorcycles and adventures. Follow Recommended from Medium Kallol Mazumdar in ILLUMINATION I Went on the Dark Web and Instantly Regretted It Accessing the forbidden parts of the World Wide Web, only to realize the depravity of humanity 8 min read · Mar 13, 2024 13.4K 254 Artturi Jalli I Built an App in 6 Hours that Makes $1,500/Mo Copy my strategy! · 3 min read · Jan 23, 2024 16.2K 177 Lists Tech & Tools 16 stories · 199 saves Unbecoming 10 Seconds That Ended My 20 Year Marriage It’s August in Northern Virginia, hot and humid. I still haven’t showered from my morning trail run. I’m wearing my stay-at-home mom… · 4 min read · Feb 16, 2022 78K 1097 Gowtham Oleti Apps I Use And Why You Should Too. Let’s skip past the usual suspects like YouTube, WhatsApp and Instagram. I want to share with you some less familiar apps that have become… 10 min read · Nov 14, 2023 21K 377 Karolina Kozmana Common side effects of not drinking By rejecting alcohol, you reject something very human, an extra limb that we have collectively grown to deal with reality and with each… 10 min read · Jan 21, 2024 29K 755 Somnath Singh in Level Up Coding The Era of High-Paying Tech Jobs is Over The Death of Tech Jobs. · 14 min read · Apr 1, 2024 4.2K 128 See more recommendations Help Status About Careers Blog Privacy Terms Text to speech Teams