This website uses cookies We use cookies to personalise content and ads, to provide social media features and to analyse our traffic. We also share information about your use of our site with our social media, advertising and analytics partners who may combine it with other information that you’ve provided to them or that they’ve collected from your use of their services. Deny Allow selection Allow all Necessary Preferences Statistics Marketing Show details COMPANY CAREERS SUSTAINABILITY INVESTORS CAR BIKE VAN RACING EN FROM 100 TO 0 KM/H: THE 50 BEST-BRAKING CARS 8/6/2015 CARS WITH BREMBO BRAKES LEAD THE AUTO MOTOR UND SPORT RANKING FOR BRAKING DISTANCES. 40 of the 50 best-braking cars are equipped with Brembo. When speaking of Supercars, all the attention is usually focused on speed and acceleration from 0 to 100 km/h. The German fortnightly magazine Auto Motor und Sport has instead reversed the vantage point, focusing on braking. In particular, the aim was to find a response to the following question: "How much space do the best cars in the world need to come to a stop from a speed of 100 km/h?" The result of this majestic test, conducted with two people in each car and after heating the brakes (9 heavy braking movements before the tenth, which was used for the measurement), is a ranking of the 50 cars that take the shortest distance to stop. The research goes back to a couple of years ago, which is why it doesn't include the most recently released Supercars. In spite of this limitation, it is still considered the most thorough study ever conducted on the subject, so we'd like to pull out a few extracts. Let it be known however, that when Auto Motor und Sport publishes updated data, we'll be the first to tell you about it. The test was conducted with two people in each car and after heating the brakes: 9 heavy braking movements before the tenth, which was used for the measurement. The best result came from the Porsche 911 GT3 (991), the only one to break the barrier of 31 metres: its mark was 30.7 metres, 30 centimetres less than its pursuers. This was achieved with Brembo discs (410 mm front, 390 mm rear) and aluminium monobloc calipers (6-piston front axle and 4-piston units at the rear) adopted as standard, as well as the structural characteristics and dynamics of the German supercar. And it was not an isolated case, as demonstrated by the equal third place obtained by two Brembo-branded custom-built cars: the Ferrari F12 Berlinetta and the KTM X-BOW GT, both credited with a mark of 31.3 metres. The first, considered the pioneer in extreme 12-cylinder cars, uses third generation carbon ceramic Brembo brakes (398 mm front, 360 mm rear). There were smaller dimensions (305 mm front, 262 mm rear) for the Brembo self-ventilated discs on the latter car, which has managed to revolutionise the world of sports cars You might be also interested in: Alfa Romeo Giulia Quadrifoglio: everything there is to know about the brakes To stop the Giulia Quadrifoglio, Brembo has provided a stock braking system that very few street cars can boast. It is called the High-performance Brembo brake system, and it comprises Brembo co-cast floating ventilated discs measuring 360 mm in the front and 350 mm in the rear. Not everyone is familiar with co-cast discs. This calls for an explanation. But the dominance of Brembo brake systems emerges in full when we look at the Top 10: 9 out of 10 are equipped with Brembo discs (in 6 cases carbon-ceramic) and Brembo calipers. Whether we are talking about Porsche or Lamborghini, Ferrari or Pagani, Lexus or Dodge, the choice of the most prestigious car manufacturers in fact fell on Brembo, which for each model created a purpose-built system. This is an acknowledgment of the build quality and performance of Brembo brake systems, powered by 40 years of experience on the racetracks in the most prestigious competitions in the world: in 2014, for example, Brembo brakes equipped the winning car in Formula 1, GP2, GP3 and the Indianapolis 500. But Brembo systems were also used in the cars that won the Le Mans 24 Hours, the World Endurance Championship and GT3 Blancpain. These triumphs confirmed, if ever proof were needed, that Brembo applies unique know-how in its work. This knowledge allows it to create discs, calipers, and pads for the most sought-after cars in the world. It is no coincidence that Brembo has the enviable role of being used to slow down 40 of the 50 fastest-braking cars in the world. In the restricted club of the 50 fastest-braking cars in the world there are 20 carmakers from 7 nations. Germany monopolises the standings with 25 models, half of the whole list. As many as 13 Porsches are on the list, but also numerous are the sports versions of Audi (5), Mercedes (3) and BMW (2) and some niche supercars as the Artega and the Wiesmann. 92% of the German cars included the Top 50 use Brembo brakes, which equips all the Porsche, Audi and Mercedes models in the standings. It is followed by Italy with 10 models, through Ferrari (3) and Lamborghini (5) and excellent models such as the Pagani Zonda and the Alfa Romeo 4c. All 10 have Brembo brake systems, which cover 100% of the Italian supercars. It is the same percentage for Japanese cars (2, a Lexus and a Subaru), which are faithful to Brembo without exception. With the United States we are not far off because three of its four cars in the standings (2 Corvettes, a Viper and a Mustang) feature Brembo brakes. The difference came in the choices made by the British supercars: out of the 7 placed in the Top 50 (5 Lotus, one McLaren, one Mini), only the John Cooper Works GP uses Brembo discs and calipers. You might be also interested in: Corvette Grand Sport: everything there is to know about the brakes The front Brembo calipers on the Grand Sport are made of aluminum on the monoblock version, in other words, the version that is machined from a cast aluminum block, and they guarantee exceptional stiffness and less deformation. Brembo S.p.A. – P.IVA 00222620163 Terms of Use Privacy Statement Site Map company info Cookie Policy Follow us on