BikeInsurance BikeSocial BikeSocial Membership Contact Us MyAccount BikeSocial News and Views Motorcycling Advice New Riders & Training - Get into biking the easy way with our guides New rider skills: Twelve differences between cars and bikes New rider skills: Twelve differences between cars and bikes News and Views Motorcycle News Racing News Features Motorcycling Advice Bike maintenance and kit care Motorcycle Riding Tips Buying & Selling a Motorcycle. All the info to get the best bike New Riders & Training - Get into biking the easy way with our guides Best A1 Licence Bikes (2023) | Specs & Prices Best motorcycle clothing for a new rider: Bike gear rated Using a fake CBT could lead to a 10-year jail term How professional athletes interpret instruction Best motorcycle for a new but shorter rider Sign up to a FREE Biker Down course today and save a life! A Complete Guide To All Motorbike Types BikeSocial’s Motorcycling Home School Britain’s 2019 Off Road Adventure School Guide Choosing your first motorbike | Getting on two wheels | Guide How much does it cost to learn to ride a motorcycle? How to get into motorcycling How to start your child in motocross | Get your kid riding Learn to ride a motorbike or scooter: A beginner’s guide My first... Accident | Riding Advice My first... Off-road experience | Riding Advice My first... Pillion | Riding Advice My first... Puncture | Riding Advice My first... Ride in the Rain | Riding Advice My first... Speed Awareness Course | Riding Advice My first... Speeding Ticket | Riding Advice Riding Advice: My first… eBay Sale New rider skills: CBT made simple - BikeSocial's guide to getting on two-wheels New rider skills: Cornering New rider skills: How to change gear like a boss New rider skills: How to ride a motorbike in strong wind New rider skills: Motorcycle speak decoded, what does it all mean? New rider skills: The bike buying checklist New rider skills: Twelve differences between cars and bikes Ten simple tips to survive your first month on a bike Tested: Honda School of Motorcycling Best 50cc motorcycles (2024) New rider advice: Top Tips for new riders…by current riders What is BikeSafe advanced motorcycle training? What’s the best way to get to work after Coronavirus? Where’s the best place to take your motorcycle test in the UK? Pick of the ads Motorcycle Blogs 1. Cars don’t lean over and are easier to steer than a bike Going round a corner in a car is fun, we aren’t denying that. But going round a corner on a bike is a completely different kind of rush! The forces that where forcing you against the car door are now pushing you down, into the motorcycle’s seat. 2. Cars don’t fall over if you just let go of them Bikes take a little more consideration when you park them. Uneven ground, stones, soft mud or drain covers could all cause you a problem when parking your new pride and joy. Also take into account the size of the bike and your own stature. A touring bike with a 870mm seat height that weighs 360kg might not be the best choice if you are 5’3’. 3.But bikes are much more satisfying in corners when you get it right Getting a corner ‘right’, on road or track, on a bike is an immensely satisfying feeling. The further you lean, the more pronounced the G-forces become and in some cases, the better the bike will perform. If you’re lucky enough to spend some time on track you also have the added bonus of maybe getting your knee down. With the advent of the adventure bike, a scuffed knee slider on your leathers is no longer the biker’s rite-of-passage it once was – that doesn’t stop it bringing a grin to your face when you manage it though. And every other time after that! 4. Cornering in a car involves trying to look through an enormous lump of metal called the A-Pillar, riders can see for miles. Depending on the type of helmet you use, a motorcyclist can have nearly 180° of uninterrupted forward vision. Add a flick of the head to each side into the equation and that could easily become 220-240°. With your mirrors near your hands and the dashboard under your nose, everything you need is there. Doing away with some of the trappings and distractions of a car not only helps make you more aware of what’s going on but also helps to make you feel like you are part of the bike. 5. Cars can only use the same five-foot wide lane as everyone else. They never have to think about ‘the best line’ through a turn because they only have one option. Riders have a choice of lines through every bend. Being on a bike makes every road feel five times wider. Instead of being stuck at the back of someone else’s queue you have your own ‘bike lane’ down the centre of the road. Plus, in corners you can either go wide for extra visibility or stay tight to avoid a hazard. Pot-holes, diesel, horse-poo and car drivers will at some point find their way in front of you and it’s your job to avoid them. Keep your eyes as far down the road as possible to spot danger. Then; don’t stare at it, because target fixation means you will hit it. Spot the danger and respond, don’t react. Plan an escape and follow it through. 6. Your arrival time in a car depends on the truck at the front of the queue, six vehicles ahead. Motorcycles use the space either side of the white line and arrive without delays. Not many car drivers know this but filtering – if done safely – is 100% legal. Done properly it can take massive chunks out of your commute. Filtering also means you aren’t sat in traffic with your engine ticking over and that’s helping the air quality, the environment and your lungs. Filtering motorcycles also help ease congestion. A study in Belgium found that if 10 percent of car drivers swapped to a bike, total time losses for all vehicles decreased by 40 percent. If 25 percent of drivers switched, congestion was eliminated entirely. Have a read of the Rider Skills articles on the site to get an idea of what you need to do. 7. Cars have airbags, seat belts, side impact bars and crumple zones. Motorcycles don’t. Riders wear their crash protection, so buy the best kit you can afford and ride sensibly. Good riding gear isn’t cheap but it will last longer, keep you drier and offer more protection than budget kit. Buy the best you can afford. Read the reviews of the gear we have already tested and wear the correct kit, properly! It’s no good buying an £800 helmet if it’s four sizes bigger than you need. If you are unsure, get to a bike show or dealership and try some stuff on. The staff will help you find the kit that works for you. 8. Car drivers hit top gear quickly and stay there as long as they can. Motorcyclists get maximum use out of every cog. Some bikes beg to ridden hard but that doesn’t always mean breaking speed limits! Bike engines are tuned and designed to be revved harder than car engines so use the revs. It may feel weird at first to use all of the power and see the rev-counter hurtling into the red but with some bikes, that’s where they're happiest. 9. Car drivers choose the most direct route and still arrive looking miserable. Motorcyclists take the back roads and arrive smiling and babbling excitedly about the B1183. Some of the best roads I have ridden have been found because I took a wrong turn or I simply thought: “I wonder what’s down there?”. Because of the extra time you have on a bike you might be more inclined to head off the dual carriageway and explore a little further than you would in a car. A bike is also a much more engaging vehicle than a car, dual carriageways and motorways will soon begin to bore you. So, head off and see where 'that road' leads you. 10. Car drivers spend Sunday morning cleaning their car. Bike riders get up at 6am and lap three counties just for a laugh. In the summer months bikers spend their weekends riding not cleaning! They don’t need to clean their bike as they have already treated it with the best rust protectant available and carried out the general maintenance tasks during the week, in the garage, with a cuppa and the radio on. 11. Car drivers think motorcyclists get wet when it rains but they get wetter walking from the office to the car park than we do riding to work in the proper kit. There is actually some pleasure to be had from riding a bike in the worst weather, yet being completely dry and warm beneath your riding gear. You know all the other road users are thinking: ‘He must be mad’. But that’s part of the appeal. I’d still rather ride a bike through rubbish weather than drive a car. 12. Car drivers become arrogant, aggressive idiots behind the wheel. Motorcyclists become freedom loving rebels, in control of their future, happily taking the long way home just for the hell of it. Arriving at your destination on a bike isn’t the end of the journey, you’ve got to get yourself back yet! But don’t go the same way, open Google Maps and have a look and see if there is another way to get you there. Some riding gear has a see-through section on the left forearm so you can slip notes in there. Mark off some towns that take you a different route back and go and explore. In all honest; any bike is an adventure bike. Riding a 125cc on L-plates from London to Manchester is just as much an adventure as doing it on some super-duper 1200cc adventure bike. Probably even more so. And it doesn’t matter what you ride or how you ride it, just ride. Recommended articles Bike maintenance and kit care Biking Tips Buying & Selling a Bike New Riders & Training Latest News from Bike Social Latest News 10/04/2024 Is Zeeho the next big name in electric bikes? 10/04/2024 Best 50cc motorcycles (2024) | Specs & Prices 10/04/2024 Best bikes for green-laning (2024) 08/04/2024 2024 MotoGP Calendar, Riders & TV Times BikeInsurance Customer Motorbike insurance Bennetts Press Bike Types and Manufacturers Car Insurance BikeSocial News and Views Latest Reviews Classic BikeSocial Motorcycle Events About BikeSocial BikeSocial Membership Join today Competitions Security Parts & Modifications Maintenance & Aftercare Track Days Contact Us About Us Careers Cookie Policy Privacy Policy Terms and Conditions Complaints Report Group Products Bennetts is a trading name of Bennetts Motorcycling Services Limited, registered in England and Wales (company number 11453343) with its registered office at 27 Old Gloucester Street, London, WC1N 3AX. Bennetts Motorcycling Services Limited is authorised and regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority (reg no. 913949). BikeSocial digital products are not regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority. This website uses cookies. Cookies improve the functionality of our website and offer you the best experience. You can delete or block all cookies but some parts of the website will not work. For information including how to stop them, click Cookie Policy.